Bene Gesserit
Organizational information
Title of leader
Headquarters
Wallach IX (Before 10191 AG - 13800 AG)
Chapterhouse (13800 AG - 15240 AG)
Affiliated organizations
Enemies
Beliefs
Holy text(s)
Historical information
Date founded
The Bene Gesserit Order, often shortened to simply the Bene Gesserit or the Sisterhood, were an ancient and adept organisation, who privately denied they were a religious order, but who operated behind an almost impenetrable screen of ritual mysticism, and whose training, symbolism, organization, and internal teaching methods were almost wholly religious. The Sisterhood consisted of all-women spies, nuns, scientists, and theologians who used genetic experimentation, galactic political interference, and religious engineering to further their own agenda of ascending the human race with the advent of their chosen one, the Kwisatz Haderach, and later simply for the good and survival of humanity. Their objectives and actions formed a critical element in the evolution of humanity.
Contents
1 History

1.1 Origins
1.2 Emergence as a universal power
1.3 Time of the Honored Matres

1.3.1 Sheeana escapes
1.1 Origins
1.2 Emergence as a universal power
1.3 Time of the Honored Matres

1.3.1 Sheeana escapes
1.3.1 Sheeana escapes
2 Objectives
3 Credo
4 Basic structure
5 Powers and abilities
6 Teachings
7 Images

7.1 Illustrations
7.2 Apocrypha
7.3 Adaptions
7.1 Illustrations
7.2 Apocrypha
7.3 Adaptions
8 Videos

8.1 Filmbook-style featurettes
8.1 Filmbook-style featurettes
9 Behind the scenes
10 References
History
Origins
The origins of the Bene Gesserit were not widely known. According to their Other Memory, they were the descendants of the Priestessess of Jowf, possibly in Mesopotamia on Old Earth. What was clear is that the Bene Gesserit arose in the political turmoil that followed the Butlerian Jihad, and quickly established themselves as an influential political force. After banding the 'sorceresses' who had existed before the Jihad  concurrent to the leaders of religions meeting to share views after the horrors of the Jihad, a move which the embryo Sisterhood encouraged, they had formed and established their hierarchial structure by the time of the Battle of Corrin twenty years after the Jihad ended.
The other memories that were made available to Reverend Mothers of the Bene Gesserit provided a wealth of knowledge that reached far back into humanity's past, to the days when Humans were bound to Earth. Some physical remnants, such as a surviving painting by Van Gogh, also supported this connection and provided an anchor point to the distant past.
Emergence as a universal power
For millennia, the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood chose to exercise its power by acting in the background of imperial politics. Through their breeding program, their placement of agents in the imperial court and Great Houses, and their provision of services. Examples being, the training of noble females, mediation in disputes, and overseers of negotiations, the Bene Gesserit carved out a significant niche in the structure of the Imperium. They were also silent partners in CHOAM along with the Bene Tleilax.
This all changed when House Atreides wrested the imperial throne from House Corrino. After the reign of Paul Atreides and his son Leto Atreides II, there came into existence a power vacuum. This vacuum was filled by both the Bene Gesserit and Bene Tleilax, who sought to maintain control over the remnants of the empire after humanity exploded across the universe in The Scattering. The Bene Gesserit came to believe that if they were to avoid coming under another tyrant, they would have to take a more active role in politics and universal events.
Time of the Honored Matres
It came to the point where the Bene Gesserit came to open conflict with both the Bene Tleilax and the Honored Matres; a bastardization of Bene Gesserit + Fish Speakers that returned from The Scattering. Indeed, the Sisterhood found themselves in a position of champion of the Old Order when the Honored Matres began attacking planets of the Old Imperium. During the war between the two Sisterhoods, the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Superior Darwi Odrade, a descendant of Paul, realized only through the Sisterhood combining with the Matres could both organizations survive into the future. First, Odrade trained her captive Murbella, a captured Matre, in the ways of the sisters. Then she and a ghola of Miles Teg, set up a plan to attack the Honored Matre base on the Guild-world of Junction. As Odrade was killed in the ensuing battle, Murbella also killed the Honored Matre leader, Logno. Murbella then decided to unite both groups into the New Sisterhood.
There was immediate resistance to the concept of the merger, as Sheeana, a rebel Reverend Mother, escaped from Chapterhouse in a No-ship, with a hundred of her fellow sisters; taking a few sandworms with them. They escaped with Miles Teg and Duncan Idaho, who had their own reasons for leaving; but Sheeana's group's intention was to set up a "pure" Gesserit outpost, far away from civilization. As the no-ship fold-spaced throughout the cosmos in an attempt to escape the tachyon net of the mysterious elderly couple, Daniel and Marty, the sisters aboard the no-ship held true to their training and structure.
Objectives
The primary objective of the Bene Gesserit was to attain further power and influence and help to direct humanity along a path of insight and stability. Up until the emergence of Leto Atreides II, the anticipated means of reaching this goal was through the Kwisatz Haderach - the one who can be all places at once, (A male Bene Gesserit "Reverend Mother Superior", a "super-being", and ultimately a Messiah-figure to serve the Missionaria Protectiva), and the ultimate objective of their age-old breeding program. The triumph of their plan was supposed to occur when the daughter of Leto Atreides I bred with Feyd Rautha Harkonnen.
However, their plans were thrown into turmoil by Jessica Atreides, when she consciously gave Leto Atreides I a son (Paul Atreides) instead of a daughter. Paul was assumed to be the Kwisatz Haderach, and, much to the dismay of the Bene Gesserit, arrived a generation too soon. Whether the order could have fully controlled the Kwisatz Haderach as they hoped remains debatable.
The Bene Gesserit’s plans are further disrupted when Paul bred with Chani, the Fremen daughter of Liet Kynes, stirring up rogue and unpredictable genetic traits. Their son, Leto Atreides II, and his actions as the God-Emperor, radically altered the long-term destiny of the Bene Gesserit. Their primary goal became the re-establishment of their power base, an intention that was severely tested by the emergence of the Honored Matres.
This objective was largely met, thanks to the merger of the Bene Gesserit and the Honored Matres, but it remained clear that their fate is still very much out of their own hands.
Credo
Religion is the emulation of the adult by the child. Religion is the encystment of past beliefs: mythology, which is guesswork, the hidden assumptions of trust in the universe, those pronouncements which men have made in search of personal power, all of it mingled with shreds of enlightenment. And always the ultimate unspoken commandment is 'Thou shall not question!' But we question. We break that commandment as a matter of course. The work to which we have set ourselves is the liberating of the imagination, the harnessing of imagination to humankind's deepest sense of creativity.
Basic structure
Women unquestionably ruled the Bene Gesserit, and while men did maintain some important roles, they were always answerable to at least one woman - the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Superior. The Mother Superior maintained ultimate control of the entire order, and invoked almost unquestioned loyalty among the subordinate Reverend Mothers. A Reverend Mother chooses her successor prior to her death, and imparts her memories and personality to her. The inheritance of the Reverend Mother Superiors, at times, diverged among multiple Reverend Mothers, usually for strategic reasons.
The subordinate Reverend Mothers of the Bene Gesserit fulfilled many diverse roles, including intelligence gathering, diplomacy, and breeding to continue the objectives of the breeding program. They also pursued more menial roles, with their occupation determined by the quality of their genetic make-up. Some of these roles were of Hidden Noble Rank, not to be shared publicly outside the senior ranks of the Sisterhood. Two such were Anirul Corrino and her daughter Irulan Corrino.
Reverend Mothers: Have undergone the Spice Agony and survived. They fill the role of advisors, faculty, historians, geneticists. General authority of the Order for most members and the outside populace.
Proctor Superiors: In charge of a chapter house, each chapter house has a Proctor Superior.
Truthsayer: taught the ways to invoke the truth trance.
Sister: agents, concubines, potential wives.
Acolyte: trainees, assistants.
Powers and abilities
The Bene Gesserit schools were designed to maximize the physical and mental potential of humanity, especially females. As a result, Bene Gesserit adepts possessed abilities that could not be rivaled by anyone else in the known universe.
Physically, a Bene Gesserit could control every muscle and nerve in their body, right down to the individual fibers. They were supreme in the disciplines of prana and bindu. The results of this training were numerous abilities, including:
Oral Analysis: Upon tasting an item, a Bene Gesserit can break down the food into its ingredients, right down to its chemical composition.
Internal Organic-Chemical Control: A Bene Gesserit is trained to develop complete control over the functions of their internal organs and body chemistry. The Bene Gesserit are therefore immune to poisons, as they can simply change the chemical makeup of any harmful substance in their body and render it harmless. This ability is used when potential Reverend Mothers take the Water of Life in order to survive the ordeal and gain Other Memory. Their control over their body chemistry is so refined that a Bene Gesserit can even control the ageing process and slow it dramatically. However, they would never attempt this, as it might call attention to the Sisterhood and reveal too much of their abilities.
Prana Bindu: Alteration of blood flow, body temperature, heart rate, and level of consciousness, for the purposes of survival in harsh environments, or escaping from bonds. A Bene Gesserit can completely control her breathing and heart rate to the degree that she can appear dead to most tests even after intense physical exertion. They can control their need for food and water to the extremes of hunger and thirst, and even commit suicide at will by simply stopping their hearts or shutting down their brains.
Weirding Way: Superior hand-to-hand combat abilities; martial arts. Bene Gesserit trained men and women unrivaled in their fighting abilities. Only Imperial Sardaukar and the Fremen of Arrakis could approach the abilities of a Bene Gesserit in regard to combat techniques, attack speed, and resourcefulness. Later, in the Age of The Tyrant, and even later, in the times after The Scattering, new abilities were developed in humans by means of genetic breeding, in extremis situations (see Miles Teg, a Bene Gesserit Bashar), or designed into ghola abilities (see "Heretics Of Dune" era Duncan Idaho).
The Voice: Ability to influence people directly by giving them orders with a certain sound frequency. When a person is ordered to do something by the use of Voice it is almost impossible not to comply. A Bene Gesserit is trained to resist the Voice. The downside of it is the phenomenon of the entire population becoming immune to it if The Voice is being overly used upon a population. Mentats can especially become immune to the Voice if he understands how it works.
Truthsense: Truthsayers are trained to sense if someone is telling the truth or not, but the other Bene Gesserit can also spot if someone is holding something back. Example: When Dr.Yueh was supposed to betray the Duke Leto of the Atreides, he felt guilty and anxious about it. Jessica had conversations with him and sensed that he is holding something back. Being informed that Bene Gesserit can sense his guilt about what he was about to do he exploited/manipulated his own emotions (remembering his wife in the grasp of Baron Harkonnen) and mentioning her every time he thought Jessica was studying him and searching for more reasons why he felt so disturbed.
Fertility Control: Bene Gesserit are able to control their own fertility. Exercising control over their own menstrual cycle and (at conception) their child's sex. They can choose when to get pregnant and the gender of their child in order to produce children when and where the order wishes, following the Bene Gesserit breeding program.
Bene Gesserit mental abilities included supreme levels of discipline. A Bene Gesserit mind could alter its level of consciousness, for the sake of relaxation, and hyper-alertness in times of potential danger. Moreover, a Bene Gesserit trained individual could:
Petit Perception: monitor minutiae in others to detect concealed emotions, motivations, agendas, or even physical things such as concealed weapons, a false accent, surgery, or deception in general. This particular skill was useful in detecting face dancers.
For more detail on Bene Gesserit training, see the related article.
Teachings
Curricula consisted of various maxims and precepts - some of which were recorded. One example was the Gom Jabbar test for humanity.
Images
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptions
Videos
Filmbook-style featurettes
Behind the scenes
A cut passage from Dune, collected in The Road to Dune, Jessica Atreides notes that the Bene Gesserit symbol was a 'Square within a square', meaning 'end of path'.
In an interview with Frank Herbert, Timothy O'Reily asked 'how did you, for instance, evolve the Bene Gesserit', to which Herbert responded 'Female Jesuits.' Meaning that, as Brian Herbert speculates, "Gesserit" is a derivative of the word "Jesuit", an order of Catholic priests still active today. Herbert, too, was aware of its translation in Latin as 'well-behaved', though that was not why he chose the name.
As above, it is considered most probable that Herbert derived the term Gesserit from Jesuit. Bene is a Hebrew term technically meaning "sons of" though used to denote a tribe. Thus, Bene Gesserit may mean the tribe or clan of the Jesuit.
The Jesuit order is largely defined by its chief emphasis on unquestioning obedience to the pontiff or pope as described by the tenet of "perinde ac cadaver", being directed as if one is a lifeless body. As such, Jessica's pregnancy with Paul would constitute a break from her Bene Gesserit identity on two counts: a violation of her vow of obedience and, symbolically, her becoming a body with life.  Herbert likely intended this fracture to represent the inherent irony of the Bene Gesserit following a worldly emissary of God at the expense of following God themselves, here represented by the true Kwisatch Hadderach, Paul.
In Mycelium Running, mycologist Paul Stamets argues that Herbert was influenced by tales of María Sabina and the sacred mushroom cults of Mexico in creating the Bene Gesserit.
Brian Herbert said of his father's creation of the Bene Gesserit:When he was a boy, eight of Dad's Irish Catholic aunts tried to force Catholicism on him, but he resisted. Instead, this became the genesis of the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. This fictional organization would claim it did not believe in organized religion, but the sisters were spiritual nonetheless. Both my father and mother were like that as well.
When he was a boy, eight of Dad's Irish Catholic aunts tried to force Catholicism on him, but he resisted. Instead, this became the genesis of the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood. This fictional organization would claim it did not believe in organized religion, but the sisters were spiritual nonetheless. Both my father and mother were like that as well.
References
↑ Dune, Appendix II
↑ Chapterhouse: Dune
↑ The Road to Dune - UNPUBLISHED SCENES AND CHAPTERSNew Chapter: THE FLIGHT FROM KYNES’S DESERT BASE:“There was a sign on it,” he said. “What did it mean?” “Square within a square,” she said. “That means ‘end of path.’ It’s a Bene Gesserit symbol.” And she wondered at the mystery of it. How had Kynes or whoever had made this place known to put a Bene Gesserit symbol there? The end that is a beginning.
↑ 4.0 4.1 2/27/78 Timothy O'Reily Interview