Butlerian Jihad
Beginning
End
Place
Result
Butlerian victoryAll computers, thinking machines and conscious robots are destroyed.Machine-based technology is wiped out.The majority of historical documents are destroyed.
All computers, thinking machines and conscious robots are destroyed.
Machine-based technology is wiped out.
The majority of historical documents are destroyed.
Unnamed Minister-Companion
The Butlerian Jihad, also known as the Great Revolt as well as commonly shortened to the Jihad, was the crusade against computers, thinking machines, and conscious robots that began in 201 B.G. and concluded in 108 B.G.
Contents
1 History

1.1 Legacy
1.2 Possible revival
1.1 Legacy
1.2 Possible revival
2 Behind the Scenes
3 Adaptions
4 Appearances
5 References
History
As mankind spread throughout the known universe, technology advanced and eventually machines were made that would make decisions for people. This propelled the creators of these machines into a new technocratic class, effectively controlling the worlds of the common people.
Mankind eventually rebelled against these machines and their creators in a nigh-religious war that sought to retake the thinking soul of mankind from the gods of machine logic. After two generations of violence, humanity took pause. Following this, their gods and rituals were looked upon in a different, perhaps even jaded, light. Both were largely seen to be guilty of using fear as a means of control. Hesitantly, the leaders of religions began meeting to exchange views, and a new, central religious precept was defined, that man may never be replaced by a machine.
Legacy
By 108 B.G., the Jihad itself had finished with the complete destruction of all intelligent machines that were originally built by humans throughout the worlds, but it proved to have many profound impacts on the sociopolitical and technological development of humanity throughout the new empires that emerged, including a large technological reversal of the entire human civilization.
The most dramatic long-lasting result was the ensuing commandment from the Orange Catholic Bible held sway to humans against the creation of machines which bore the human mind's exact image: Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a human mind, after the destruction of the man-made intelligent machines throughout the human worlds. Even the simplest computers and calculators were banned, with the penalty for building or owning such a thinking machine technology being put to trial and sentenced to immediate death.
This lack of thinking technology created a severe gap in humanity's quality of life, revolving around a need for humans to perform complex logical computations and calculations. This gap led to the creation of the mentat order (which would be later outlawed by Leto Atreides II in an attempt to realize the Golden Path strategy), the Bene Gesserit, and the Spacing Guild. Non-thinking machines, however, were still utilized. As centuries passed, two fringe worlds, Ix and Tleilax, brought technological heights of the Ixians and the Bene Tleilax. Ixians specialized in the creation of non-thinking mechanical devices; while biological technology was provided by the Tleilax to replace the mechanical thinking technology used prior to the Jihad.
Aside from the long-lasting effects of the Jihad, the belief in the spiritual divinity of humankind was renewed and strengthened as a component of the Jihad, specifically in contrast to the "evil thinking machines".
The last major impact of the Jihad was the rise of a new system, a feudal-arranged galactic order that lasted for several thousand more years under the rule of House Corrino before Muad'Dib's Jihad and the rise of God Emperor Leto Atreides II. This order, known as the Corrino Empire, was comprised of several new and powerful groups, including the Spacing Guild, the Bene Gesserit, CHOAM, the Landsraad, and the Great Houses.
Possible revival
Toward the end of the reign of the God Emperor Leto Atreides II, there was talk on Parella and the planets of Dan about another Butlerian Jihad. These "empty dreams", as Leto called them, never came to pass.
Behind the Scenes
In literature, the Butlerian Jihad is a useful plot device for Frank Herbert. By creating a universe which has rejected conscious machines and has reversed into a quasi-feudal organization, Herbert can focus on social and philosophical issues, rather than the technological issues. Consequently Herbert uses the Dune saga to comment about the human condition and makes direct and accurate parallels to current socio-political realities. The Jihad also provides a reason why we never see computers, calculators, and all forms of "thinking machine" in the original Dune novels by Frank Herbert.
The name could very easily be a literary allusion to Samuel Butler, whose 1872 novel Erewhon depicted a people who had destroyed machines for fear they would be out-evolved by them.
From Erewhon, Chapter 9,
Another, more subtle justification for the Butlerian Jihad is also found in Frank Herbert's original novels, specifically Heidegger's thesis that the use of technology trains humans to think like machines. The problem is that machines are deterministic; thus, training people to be machines is self-limiting. Herbert seemed to think that to be human is to be essentially 'open-ended', capable of undiscovered, indeterminate evolution, both personally and as a species.
The Great Revolt - 1984 film
Adaptions
The TV version of the 1984 film contains an extended prologue. It depicts the Jihad through a series of paintings and uses the alternative name "the Great Revolt", referenced in the The Dune Encyclopedia, and places it 4,050 years before the events of the film. Dune: Prophecy episode 1 'The Hidden Hand' depicts a battle between humans and Thinking Machines, although this is directly based on the Expanded Dune counterpart.
Cymeks in Dune: Prophecy
Appearances
Dune (mentioned only)
Dune Messiah (mentioned only)
Children of Dune (seen in a vision)
God Emperor of Dune (mentioned only)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
Chapterhouse: Dune (mentioned only)
References
↑ Dune, Glossary entry for Butlerian Jihad
↑ "Once men turned their thinking over to machines in the hope that this would set them free. But that only permitted other men with machines to enslave them."

- Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, Dune
↑ 3.0 3.1 "Then came the Butlerian Jihad — two generations of chaos. The god of machine-logic was overthrown among the masses and a new concept was raised: 'Man may not be replaced.'"

- Dune, Appendix II
↑ Men looked at their gods and their rituals and saw that both were filled with that most terrible of all equations: fear over ambition.- Dune, Appendix II
↑ God Emperor of Dune