Chani Kynes
Aliases
Political Information
Titles
Great House
Affiliation and Relationships
Loyalty
Fremen
Atreides Empire
Family members
Pardot Kynes † (grandfather)
Liet-Kynes † (father)
Faroula † (mother)
Stilgar  (uncle)
Leto Atreides II the Elder † (son)
Leto Atreides II † (son)
Ghanima Atreides † (daughter)
Romances
Biographical Information
Place of birth
Died
Place of death
Resting place
Military Information
Weapons
Battles/Wars
Desert WarBattle of Arrakeen
Battle of Arrakeen
Physical Characteristics
Eyes
Hair
Contents
1 Biography

1.1 Upbringing
1.2 Introduction & life with Paul
1.3 Pregnancy & death
1.1 Upbringing
1.2 Introduction & life with Paul
1.3 Pregnancy & death
2 Description
3 Quotes
4 Gallery

4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
5 Trivia
6 Appearances
7 References
Biography
Upbringing
Chani was born on Arrakis, the daughter of half-Fremen planetologist Liet Kynes and Fremen herbalist Faroula. A formidable fighter by the time of her father's death, Chani served under her uncle and Naib, Stilgar, at their primary residency of Sietch Tabr.
Introduction & life with Paul
After Arrakis was invaded by Harkonnen and Sardaukar forces, Paul and his mother Jessica managed to escape a Harkonnen ornithopter but found themselves in the deep desert where they were to be left for dead. While sheltering in a large rock formation from a rampaging sandworm, they were intercepted by a band of Fremen travelers including Chani, who were sent by her father to locate the Atreides refugees.
Her introduction to Paul came during a tense stand-off incited by Jamis and her uncle, who was both subdued and impressed by Jessica's combat prowess. Although familiar to the Atreides heir because of his prescient dreams on Caladan, Chani saw only a stranger.
After assimilating Paul and Jessica into Fremen society with Stilgar's guidance, Chani began her lasting love affair with the young Duke - now known as Usul and Muad'Dib - and eventually bore him a son named after Paul's late father. However, their firstborn soon shared his namesake's fate at the hands of a Sardaukar raiding party while his parents and grandmother were visiting another sietch. This tragic loss drove Paul to take the Water of Life and fall into a long coma until he could be revived by Chani's familiarity with the transmutation process.
After the Fremen-lead victory over House Harkonnen and House Corrino and Paul's subsequent ascension to the Golden Lion Throne through his marriage to Shaddamn IV's eldest daughter, Chani became his official concubine but remained his sole lover after being reassured by Jessica that history would remember her as "wife."
Pregnancy & death
Now a resident at her Emperor's colossal Arrakeen Palace, Chani suffered years of persistent fertility issues from having her meals laced with contraceptives by Princess Irulan so she could become the sole bearer of Paul's children and secure the Corrino bloodline - a plot sanctioned by the Bene Gesserit, who feared the impact of Chani's undocumented ancestry on their breeding program.
Irulan's sabotage ultimately proved fruitless against Chani's decision to take heavy doses of melange to counteract her infertility. After a traumatic and accelerated pregnancy that left her constantly famished and addicted, she went into labor at Sietch Tabr and gave birth to preborn twins, whom Paul named Ghanima and Leto II.
Tragically, Irulan's treachery was unintentionally lethal for the royal mother, who succumbed to her spice overdose and the trauma of childbirth.
At the apex of their own conspiracy against the Emperor, Tleilaxu agents Bijaz and Scytale offered to resurrect his loved one with their axlotl tanks and mnemonic conditioning, citing their previous revival of Duncan Idaho and his former memories. Despite his crippling grief and temptation, Paul refused their proposition and had them both killed, knowing the cost of such dealings with the Bene Tleilax.
Her remains were eventually interred in the extensive crypt beneath her son's desert Citadel.
Description
Chani is described as skinny with an elfin face bearing the dark and whiteless blue eyes of her fellow Fremen. She also had long and tawny-red hair like her eventual daughter.
Quotes
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptations
Trivia
In 2010, Chani actress Sean Young posted a YouTube video of her behind-the-scenes footage of David Lynch's 1984 production, filmed by her own Super 8 camera.
Only the 2000 miniseries depicts Chani's firstborn son, and her red hair color is absent in all three adaptations.
Zendaya's portrayal of Chani is a more skeptical character than her source material, showing initial distrust of the offworld exiles while recognizing the Fremen prophecy as foreign propaganda from Jessica's Sisterhood. Despite her suspicions and concerns over the growing religious fervor in her people, she ends up falling in love with the humble and reluctant Mahdi, who seems to be a sincere and powerful asset until her eventual manipulation by him and his mother into fulfilling her end of the prophecy with "desert spring tears." Cementing himself as the supreme leader of her society, her grief over this betrayal could be seen as supplanting the death of her firstborn son from the book, losing the man Paul was prior to his drinking the Water of Life.
Appearances
Dune
Dune Messiah
Children of Dune (ego-memory)
God Emperor of Dune (mentioned only)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
Chapterhouse: Dune (mentioned only)
References
↑ Dune - Chapter 43: "Sihaya," Paul said, using his intimate name for her.
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: Stilgar approaches," Chani said. "I must stand apart now, beloved. Now, I must be Sayyadina and observe the rite that it may be reported truly in the Chronicles.
↑ Dune - Appendix I: The Ecology of Dune: A direct and simple man in many ways, Pardot Kynes. One must evade Harkonnen restrictions? Excellent. Then one marries a Fremen woman. When she gives you a Fremen son, you begin with him, with Liet-Kynes
↑ Dune - Chapter 31: I am Chani, daughter of Liet." The voice was lilting, half filled with laughter. "I would not have permitted you to harm my companions," she said.
↑ God Emperor of Dune:  mother was  Fremen consort, Chani.  maternal grandmother was Faroula, a noted herbalist among the Fremen.
↑ Dune - Chapter 42: And Paul saw the look of unrest in Chani's glance, the way she looked from Stilgar, who was her uncle, to Paul-Muad'Dib, who was her mate.
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: Yet Chani was deep in the south -- in the cold country where the sun was hot -- secreted in one of the new sietch strongholds, safe with their son, Leto II.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 1: These twins, now . . . through Chani, their mother and my kinswoman, my blood flows in their veins, I am there with Muad'Dib and Chani and all the others.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 5:  And now she lived only for the children given to Paul by his Fremen concubine, Chani.
↑ Dune- Chapter 48: I swear to you now," he whispered, "that you'll need no title. That woman over there will be my wife and you but a concubine because this is a political thing and we must weld peace out of this moment, enlist the Great Houses of the Landsraad. We must obey the forms. Yet that princess shall have no more of me than my name. No child of mine nor touch nor softness of glance, nor instant of desire.
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: "I was born in the desert, Usul. I know how to use a crysknife."
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: Paul remembered he had rushed out to find Chani standing beneath the yellow globes of the corridor, clad in a brilliant blue wraparound robe with hood thrown back, a flush of exertion on her elfin features. She had been sheathing her crysknife.
↑ 13.0 13.1 Dune - Chapter 22: She had a full head of tawny red hair. As he stared, she opened her eyes. Those eyes! Chani peered out of her eyes
↑ Dune - Chapter 31
↑ Dune - Chapter 3
↑ Dune - Chapter 34