Dune
Author
Published
Pages
Timeline
Dune is a science fiction novel written by Frank Herbert and published in 1965. A winner of the Hugo Award and Nebula Award for outstanding science fiction, Dune is popularly considered one of the greatest science fiction novels of all time, and is frequently cited as the best-selling science fiction novel in history. Dune spawned five sequels written by Herbert, and inspired a film adaptation by David Lynch, two miniseries made by the United States-based Sci-Fi Channel, computer games, the trilogy by Denis Villeneuve (Part One released in 2021, Part Two in 2024 and Part Three anounced for december 2026). A cinema adaptation should been made by Alejandro Jodorowsky, but it couldn't be done and that finally lead to the documentary movie directed by Frank Pavich Jodorowsky's Dune. There's as well series of prequels, interquels, and sequels co-written by Brian Herbert, the author's son, and Kevin J. Anderson.
Dune is set far in the future, amidst a sprawling feudal intergalactic empire, where planetary fiefdoms are controlled by Noble Houses that owe allegiance to the Imperial House Corrino. The first novel, modestly entitled Dune, tells the story of young Paul Atreides. Heir apparent to Duke Leto Atreides I from the planet Caladan, he and his family have to relocate to the planet Arrakis, an extremely arid world that is the universe's only source of the spice melange. In a story that explores the complex interactions of politics, religion, ecology, technology, and human nature, the fate of Paul, his family, his new planet and its native inhabitants, as well as the Padishah Emperor, the powerful Spacing Guild, and the secretive female order of the Bene Gesserit, are all drawn together into confrontations that will change the course of humanity.
The novel was originally serialised in the magazine, Analog, from 1963 to 1965 as two shorter works: Dune World and The Prophet of Dune.
Contents
1 Synopsis

1.1 Political backdrop of Dune
1.1 Political backdrop of Dune
2 Plot Synopsis
3 Development
4 Setting
5 Themes
6 Continuity

6.1 Characters
6.2 Planets and locations
6.3 Organizations
6.4 Titles
6.5 Events
6.1 Characters
6.2 Planets and locations
6.3 Organizations
6.4 Titles
6.5 Events
7 References to the real world
8 Allusions/references from other works
9 Awards and nominations
10 Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
11 Trivia
12 Gallery

12.1 Covers
12.1 Covers
13 References
Synopsis
Political backdrop of Dune
Opening twenty-thousand years into the future, the human race has scattered throughout the galaxy, populating multiple planets ruled by aristocratic Houses who themselves answer to the galaxy's Imperial family House Corrino. Key is the control of the desert planet Arrakis, the only source of the valuable spice melange. Spice gives those who ingest it an extended life and prescient awareness. Melange is crucial as it enables space travel. This domain is monopolized by the Spacing Guild; its Navigators use the spice to safely plot a course for the Guild ships via prescience using "foldspace" technology. So they can travel instantaneously to anywhere in the galaxy.
Ten thousand years before the beginning of the story, the human race had purged all machines that had replicated many of the functions of the human mind. This event, known as the Butlerian Jihad, resulted in the destruction of all the robots, computers, “thinking machines,” ( including the computer-navigators). Subsequently, it was necessary to replace spaceship computers with humans having the ability to assume same role. That's how emerged the Guild Navigators to allow ships to travel safely through space. The functions of the logical computers were replaced by the Mentats, humans who, through intensive training, learned to enter a heightened mental state in which they could perform complex logical computations.
The spice is also crucial to the powerful matriarchal order called the Bene Gesserit. The secretive Bene Gesserit, often referred to as "witches", possess mental and physical powers developed through a combination of thousands of generations of genetic selection and years of physical and mental conditioning. When a Bene Gesserit acolyte becomes a full Reverend Mother by undergoing a massive overdose of specific narcotics (called "The Agony"), she gains access to her "ancestral memories" — the complete life experiences of all her female ancestors back to the point of conception. Only women have been able to survive the transformation. However, the Bene Gesserit have a secret, centuries-old breeding program to create a prescient superhuman — and male equivalent of a Reverend Mother — called the Kwisatz Haderach, who would not only be able to survive The Agony, but whose “organic mental powers would bridge space and time”.
The planet Arrakis is completely covered in a desert ecosystem, hostile to most organic life. It is also sparsely settled by a human population of native Fremen tribes arrived a long time ago after an exodus. Tribal leaders are selected by defeating the former leader in combat to death. The Fremen also have complex rituals and systems focusing on the value and conservation of water, a so rare and precious ressource on their arid planet. They conserve the water distilled from their dead, consider spitting an honorable greeting, and value tears as the greatest gift one can give to the dead. Their culture also revolves around the spice, which is created as part of the life cycle of the giant sandworms who dominate the deserts. Bene Gesserit missionary efforts — which the mission is to implement in populations supersitions in the aim to influence the evolving of humanity — have implanted a belief about a male Messiah who will one day come and transform Arrakis into a world more hospitable to humans. When the Atreides familiy will come into Arrakis, the Fremens will believe that Paul is their Messiah, the Mahdi.
Plot Synopsis
Paul and Jessica meet the Reverend Mother at Castle Caladan
The central figure of the book is Paul, son and heir presumptive to Duke Leto Atreides, head of the House Atreides, and Leto's concubine, Jessica, a Bene Gesserit. The Bene Gesserit perform many functions in the Empire, as Truthsayers (human lie detectors), negotiators, advisors, and teachers, but all these functions serve one deeper purpose: for at least ten thousand years, they have been selectively breeding humans trying to improve humanity.
The goal of their breeding program is the Kwisatz Haderach, a human being who will be aware of both maternal and paternal ancestral memories, and have prescient abilities greater than those of the Guild's navigators. The Bene Gesserit are close, they believe, to the fruition of their plan, and Paul Atreides is at the heart of it. Jessica, his mother, disobeyed Bene Gesserit orders out of attachment to Leto Atreides, and gave birth to a boy, Paul. Her express orders had been to produce a girl, whom the Bene Gesserit would have mated with a Harkonnen, and they hoped from this union they would produce the Kwisatz Haderach. Ultimately, the change in plan causes Paul Atreides to exhibit unexpected resources, and possibilities that were unforeseen by the Bene Gesserit plan.
With House Atreides becoming increasingly more powerful within the Landsraad, the Padishah Emperor concocts a plan to rid the Imperium of the great house under the guise of a Harkonnen attack. The emperor awards House Atreides with the stewardship of Arrakis, a desert planet and the only source of the most valuable substance in the universe, spice melange. Whilst Leto is aware that the Emperor is out to betray him, he sees Arrakis as a way to prove himself within the Landsraad and grow in power by turning around Arrakis — a feat that had not been accomplished by the Harkonnens in eight decades.
House Atreides strategise
The move to Arrakis is difficult for the Atreides, and they find that the equipment left by the Harkonnens has been deliberately sabotaged in order to increase their chances of failing. Navigating the complex relationships on Arrakis too proves difficult, and it is often unknown where alliances lie. It quickly becomes clear to Jessica and the other members of the Atreides house that there are several stakeholders at play on Arrakis, among them, the powerful Spacing Guild whom have been taking bribes from the Fremen to keep Arrakis clear of satellites.
Arrakeen under attack
The Harkonnen attack is more diabolical, more powerful, and comes more quickly than the Atreides expect, however The Harkonnens manage to gain a spy in the Atreides inner household, and in doing so achieve something unique in Imperial history: they break the "imperial conditioning" of a Suk doctor, which had been universally believed to make a person incapable of consciously causing physical harm. The Harkonnens bend the Atreides doctor – Yueh – to their will by promising to release his wife from prolonged imprisonment and torture.
When the Harkonnens attack, Yueh lowers the defensive house shields and uses sedative drugs to disable Leto, Paul, and Jessica, leaving the Atreides leaderless and disorganized under the Harkonnen and Sardaukar military onslaught. The Atreides army is crushed, with only a few remnants managing to escape.
Paul and Jessica are sent into the desert to die. Because of the use of truthsayers in the Empire, the Baron Harkonnen needs to be able to say truthfully that he was not (directly) responsible for their deaths. However, this plan is foiled by arrangements made by Yueh and Paul and Jessica manage to kill their captors and escape into the desert.
Leto and the Baron
Yueh, eager for a shot at killing the Baron he so deeply despises and knowing he won't have the chance himself, implants a fake tooth in Leto's mouth. When bitten, the tooth emits a poison that will be fatal to both Leto, and hopefully, the Baron Harkonnen. When Yueh hands over Leto, Baron Harkonnen kills Yueh. Leto, still paralyzed, but conscious, attempts to kill the Baron by breaking the gas capsule, but misjudges his moment, and is only successful in killing the Baron's adviser and Mentat, Piter de Vries.
Paul and Jessica pursued by a Sandworm
Paul and Jessica initially met up with planetologist Liet Kynes and Swordmaster Duncan Idaho, hiding in a botanical testing station abandoned long ago. However, they are not there long before the station is attacked by Sardaukar, who kill Duncan. Paul and Jessica flee to the deep desert in an ornithopter, parting ways with Dr Kynes. They let the Harkonnens think they have died from a Coriolis storm.
In the deep desert, under the pressure of extreme circumstances and the increased doses of Spice that he has been ingesting simply by living on Arrakis, some of Paul's powers come into fruition, and his ability to see possible futures explodes into awareness. He sees many things, a way out of his situation, and the restoration of the Atreides, if only he can make contact with the native Fremen and survive.
Paul and Jessica meet the Fremen
After a dangerous crossing of the desert, Paul and Jessica manage to meet up with a troop of Fremen. Paul and Jessica prove their worth by disarming Fremen in unarmed combat, aided by Bene Gesserit prana-bindu tralietining – the "Weirding Way" – and the Fremen leader Stilgar gladly accepts them into his troop because he would like to add that skill to the Fremen people. Paul also meets a young woman, Chani, daughter of Liet Kynes, who himself dies in a spice blow after wandering through the desert having hallucinations of his father. Paul has long seen Chani in his dreams. During this scuffle, Paul disarms a proud Fremen, Jamis, who takes offence at this "presumptuous" youth, and challenges Paul to a fight to the death. Superficially, this contest between a grown man and an untried fifteen-year-old boy would seem grossly unfair. But Paul having been trained by masters of the sword, and although at first unwilling to kill, triumphs easily, making his name in the tribe, and also succeeding to the position of head of the household of the dead man. At the same time, Paul and Jessica are introduced to the deadly harshness of the Fremen lifestyle, as the Fremen ritually and literally render Jamis down to his water because it is so precious to them. Stilgar gives Paul the name Usul – meaning "the strong base of a pillar" – as his private name within the troop; Paul gives himself the name "Paul Muad'dib" as his public Fremen name.
When they return to the troop's hidden cave dwelling, known as a sietch, they discover the Fremen Reverend Mother is near death, and with the fortuitous arrival of Jessica, a Bene Gesserit, they make Jessica their Sayyadina. The Fremen have been so influenced by the Bene Gesserit that they attempt to emulate many of their actions with some success including the creation of Reverend Mothers. Jessica, not realizing the consequences of what the Fremen are about to do, accepts to cement her place in the tribe. Halfway through the process she realizes she has made a mistake, that she is involved in a similar process to how the Bene Gesserit make their own Reverend Mothers who can see genetic memories, and realizes that the baby in her womb, fathered by Leto before his death, will also go through the process. This has truly unfortunate consequences, because it is a Bene Gesserit teaching that any such baby will not have the strength to withstand the memories of its ancestors.
Years pass. Paul Muad'dib learns to be a Fremen, and becomes something of a religious leader among the Fremen. Chani becomes his lover (but not his wife, as will become significant later) and bears him a son, whom he calls Leto. He and his mother train the Fremen of Sietch Tabr and other Fremen who seek out Paul in his religious guise, in the Weirding Way, the Bene Gesserit's prana-bindu fighting techniques. Under his leadership his "Fedaykin" experience victory after victory against the Harkonnens, and Paul's prestige and aura among the Fremen grow.
Paul calls his first sandworm
In order to be truly accepted by the Fremen he must become a sandrider. The Fremen have a great secret: they have learned to control the giant sandworms native to Arrakis. Through the use of "maker hooks", they have learned to climb aboard the worms and take control of their course, enabling them to quickly move around the desert. This has given the Fremen better mobility than any of the series of occupying armies of Arrakis, as air power cannot be projected in the face of common Coriolis storms. Obviously riding a giant sandworm is not the safest of tasks, but Paul attempts it and succeeds, becoming a full member of the sietch.
The same day, a band of smugglers sought melange too deep in the desert, and the Fremen of Sietch Tabr spring a trap. In the middle of the battle Paul recognises his weapons teacher, Gurney Halleck, and calls on him and his men to surrender. Gurney is overjoyed and overwhelmed in equal measure. He surrenders his men, and joins Paul's service. Among Gurney's men, however, are some Imperial spies who attempt to kill Muad'dib. They are unsuccessful, and they are captured by the Fedaykin. Paul gives secret orders for the spies to be allowed to escape, so that they would reveal that Paul Atreides still lives on Arrakis. Taking advantage of recruiting Gurney Halleck, Paul uses the moment to solve his leadership problem. Since he has become a wormrider many of his followers have expected Muad'dib to challenge Stilgar, his greatest friend among the Fremen, in order to take control of Sietch Tabr. But Paul breaks tradition and in doing so forces Stilgar to do the same, managing to sidestep this issue by proclaiming himself the ruling Duke of Arrakis, and thus taking power without killing his friend.
Gurney threatens to kill Jessica
They return to Sietch Tabr. Gurney is shocked to discover Jessica is still alive, because he believes she was the one who betrayed the Atreides and that Paul does not know. Gurney is about to kill her when Paul walks in, manages to stop him, and explains that Yueh was the traitor. Gurney is almost broken by his nearly fatal and tragic error, but Jessica forgives him and he is bound even further into Atreides and Jessica's service.
Paul's power among the Fremen grows, but he is still frustrated. He is not all he could be: he cannot control his journeys into the future, and much of it is still blank to him. He takes a truly risky step and consumes a tiny amount of a concentrated form of melange called spice essence, and so attempts to perform the male equivalent of the Reverend Mother ceremony. Previously to this no man has survived this experience, and it seems he fails also, as he sinks into a coma.
The Sardaukar on Arrakis
Paul neglects to tell anyone what he is doing; many people think he is dead, although others, primarily the Fedaykin, believe he is in a religious trance. His mother, Jessica, does all she can to wake him but fails, so out of desperation she calls Chani from the deep desert to help. Chani, through her more personal knowledge of Paul's dreams and desires, realises what a mad thing Paul has done, and uses spice essence converted by Jessica using her powers as a Reverend Mother to bring him out of his trance. For Paul no time has passed, and he glories in his new memories and powers — he tells his mother and Chani immediately that the Emperor himself is currently orbiting the planet with many Sardaukar, ready to attack. He has proven the Bene Gesserit wrong: he is the Kwisatz Haderach, appearing one generation ahead of the prediction. He declares that it is now time to destroy the Harkonnens.
Fremen attacks on the Harkonnens had already managed to almost entirely stop the flow of the spice from Arrakis. This forced the Emperor to act, and he comes to Arrakis with all his Sardaukar, and also levies of all the other noble houses, to annihilate the Fremen if necessary in order to get the spice flowing again.
By now the Emperor is aware of who Muad'dib is. In advance of his arrival, he sends a large Sardaukar force into the deep desert for information. Attacking a sietch, they manage to kill Paul's son, and capture Alia – Paul's sister – but are driven off by Fremen children, old people and women.
The Sardaukar are defeated
After the Emperor himself has landed, Paul launches the final attack. Using the House Atriedes' family atomics (nuclear weapons) that his men managed to retrieve after the Harkonnen attack, he blows a hole in the Shield Wall (a mountain/rock wall) that protects the capital of Dune, Arrakeen, from the surrounding desert and its fierce storms. By using the weapons this way, he narrowly avoids contravening the universal ban against using atomics on people, which would have required the other noble houses to retaliate with "planetary annihilation". The Fremen attack under cover of a huge desert storm, riding sandworms from the desert through the hole in the Shield Wall. The great static force of the sandstorm then shorts out all of the Sardaukar's defensive shields. The Sardaukar are unable to withstand the full force of the Fremen, caught as they are in total surprise, and the Emperor is forced to surrender.
The Baron's death by Gom Jabbar
The combined forces of the Landsraad still loom in orbit around the planet, but Paul threatens to destroy the Spice if any of them try to land, and they back off. In the surprise of Muad'dib's attack, Alia manages to escape, and in the process kills Baron Harkonnen, by now revealed to be hers and Paul's grandfather, having illegitimately sired Jessica.
Paul is victorious
Realizing that Muad'dib is not some mad Fremen religious leader changes the situation dramatically for the Emperor. Feyd-Rautha, the Baron's nephew, an acclaimed gladiator, challenges Paul to single combat; claiming rights of kanly as had been declared by Paul's father, Leto. Kanly is a formal feud or vendetta under the rules of the Great Convention, carried on according to the strictest limitations. Paul agrees, even knowing that he may die, but after a difficult fight during which Feyd-Rautha attempts treachery in the form of a poisoned knife and needle, Paul eventually triumphs.
Paul refuses to take any more nonsense. He forces the Emperor from the throne by the simple expedience of taking power from the real rulers of the Empire – the Spacing Guild – who control space travel. He again threatens to destroy the spice if they do not ship all the troops home. The Spacing Guild has no choice – their limited powers of prophecy show Paul is capable of it – and they send everyone home. The Emperor abdicates and retires to Salusa Secundus. Paul marries the Emperor's eldest daughter, Irulan (in name only; Chani remains his close companion and mother of his heirs, as Jessica did for Leto), and assumes control of the Empire. Irulan later writes extensively on the subject of Muad'Dib, having nothing of him but knowledge of his lifestyle and patterns of thought.
Paul promises the Fremen that he will turn Arrakis into a garden planet, while permitting that the deserts remain so that the sandworms (and consequently the melange) will survive; and all seems well in the real life of Paul Atreides.
Development
Analog magazine December 1963 cover - Art by John Schoenherr
Frank Herbert intended ecologist Liet-Kynes to be the protagonist of the story in some drafts and Duke Leto Atreides I's draft equivalent Jesse Linkam in others. Herbert and his agent Lurton Blassingame shopped around for serialisation options and eventually settled on Analog magazine. Editor John W. Campbell Jr. payed $2,550 (three cents a word) for the serialisation rights. He felt as if Paul's power of Prescience would make for a difficult novel to write, telling Herbert 'Congratulations! You are now the father of a 15-year-old superman!" Herbert strongly felt as if it was necessary for his character and wrote Campbell a five page philosophical essay, which convinced him. Herbert initially broke the novel into four chunks, each with a synopsis but changed it to 3 at the requirement of Analog. While they orgaised the serialisation, they also shopped around for a publisher for a complete novel version of Dune. Science fiction of the time typically ranged from 50,000-75,000 words and the 3 parts of Dune totaled to 200000. The novel was rejected by numerous publishers including Doubleday & Co., Charles Scribner’s Sons, Harcourt, Brace & World, E. P. Dutton and Dodd, Mead & Co. Herbert's later instalment, book 3 "The Prophet", would require an additional 5 magazine issues to serialise, but Campbell obliged, claiming that Dune was the kind of "swashbuckler" tale he wanted for Analog. Artist John Schoenherr was commissioned to draw Dune's serialised artwork. Herbert was thrilled, claiming that Schoenherr "caught with tremendous power and beauty the ‘Dune mood’ I struggled so hard to create." and that it was "one of the few such works of which I’d like to have the original." In early drafts Alia Atreides was killed off, but Campbell persauded him into keeping her alive for follow-up stories. Herbert had to trim fully completed chapters for length: These chapters are collected in The Road to Dune. While the novel was still being serialised, Dune World was nominated for a Hugo Award. In early 1965, the Dune novel was finally picked up by Chilton Books, a company best known for publishing car repair manuals. Editor Sterling Lanier, a fellow science-fiction author, had seen the story in Analog and contacted Blassingame, purchasing the rights for $7,500 plus future royalties. Lanier wanted the novel published as one, thick, hardcover, entitled simply Dune and commissioned Schoenherr for the cover art. Dune was released on the 1st of October.
Setting
At the time of the novel, advanced computers have long been forbidden due to an event known as the Butlerian Jihad, and the ensuing commandment of the Orange Catholic Bible: "Thou shalt not make a machine in the likeness of a man's mind," with the penalty of being sentenced to death. In lieu of computer assistance, human skills have been developed to an astonishing degree:
Mentats through intensive training learn to enter a heightened mental state in which they can perform complex logical computations. Most of the best Mentats, and all of the popular "twisted Mentats," are trained/grown by the Bene Tleilax, although Paul Atreides is not, having been trained by the Master of Assassins, Thufir Hawat as well as his own mother the Lady Jessica Atreides. Mentats are also used in lesser extent by the Bene Gesserit.
The Spacing Guild holds a monopoly on interstellar transport. Its navigators use the spice/drug melange to gain limited prescient abilities, enabling them to safely use the "fold space" technology — guiding Guild Heighliner ships safely to their destination by using a Holtzman engine, which allows instantaneous travel to anywhere in the galaxy.
The Bene Gesserit is a secretive female society, often referred to as "witches," with mental and physical powers developed through thousands of generations of controlled gene lines and many years of physical and mental conditioning called prana-bindu training. When a Bene Gesserit acolyte becomes a full Reverend Mother, by undergoing the Agony she gains her "ancestral memories" — the complete life experience of an infinite line of female ancestors (she cannot recall the memories of her male ancestors, and is terrified by the psychic space within her that the masculine memories inhabit). The Agony is caused by taking the bile of a dying sandworm, a poison that they must metabolically render benign within their bodies, or else they would fail the trial, and die from its lethal toxicity.
On the fringes of the Galaxy are the geneticist Tleilaxu, who create shape shifters, reincarnated gholas, and Mentats, and Ix, a planet whose history is lost in the mists of time and whose society is dominated by technology. The CHOAM corporation is the major underpinning of the Imperial economy, with shares and directorships determining each House's income and financial leverage.
The universe's entire power structure, including the financial and military power of the Imperium and the Great Houses, the Guild's control of interstellar travel, and the Bene Gesserit's special powers, are all subject to the availability of Melange. The control of Melange by a single group is a sociopolitical condition known as hydraulic despotism (utilizing control of a commodity with a single source to hold power over others).
A prominent feature of the setting is the use of evolved languages and linguistic traits, just as J.R.R. Tolkien developed ancient languages and linguistic traits in The Lord of the Rings.
Themes
The consequences of the actions of superheroes, and humanity's responses, form an overarching theme in the Dune series. In an interview with Frank Herbert published in Omni Magazine in July 1980, the author said:
Also:
The emphasis on ecological and religious ideas and the use of many cultural themes made the novel a provocative departure from previous science fiction.
Political themes in the Dune series include human beings' susceptibility to mass manipulation by political propaganda, religious dogma (e.g., The Missionaria Protectiva), and sexual temptation, and the importance of self-awareness and self-mastery in resisting these types of control, as well as the study of power and control.
Continuity
Characters
Abulurd Harkonnen (mentioned only)
Abulurd Rabban (mentioned only)
Abu Zide (mentioned only)
Albe (mentioned only)
St. Augustine (mentioned only)
Ali Ben Ohashi (mentioned only)
Alia Atreides
Anirul Corrino (mentioned only)
Aramsham
Arkie
Chalice Corrino (mentioned only)
Chani Kynes
Chatt
Coss
Czigo
Drisq (mentioned only)
Duncan Idaho
Elrood Corrino IX (mentioned only)
Esmar Tuek
Farok
Farrukh
Fedor (mentioned only)
Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen
Gaius Helen Mohiam
Geoff (mentioned only)
Glossu Rabban Harkonnen
Gurney Halleck
Halloway (mentioned only)
Harah
Hasimir Fenring
Holjance Vohnbrook (mentioned only)
Iakin Nefud
Ingsley (mentioned only)
Irulan Corrino
Jamis
Jessica Atreides
Josifa Corrino (mentioned only)
Kaleff
Kautman (mentioned only)
Kinet
Koneywell (mentioned only)
Korba
Larus
Lemil
Leto Atreides I
Leto Atreides II the Elder
Liet Kynes
Lingar Bewt
Maometh (mentioned only)
Mapes
Margot Fenring
Mattai
Mitha (mentioned only)
Neshou (mentioned only)
Nisai (mentioned only)
Orlop
Otheym
Pander Oulson (mentioned only)
Pardee (mentioned only)
Pardot Kynes (mentioned only)
Paul Atreides
Piter de Vries
Ramallo
Rugi Corrino (mentioned only)
Shaddam Corrino I (mentioned only)
Shaddam Corrino IV
Shamir
Shimoom
Shishakli
Shoab
"Soo-Soo"
Staban Tuek
Stilgar
Subiay (mentioned only)
Sumer (mentioned only)
Tharthar
Thufir Hawat
Toure Bomoko (mentioned only)
Turok (mentioned only)
Uliet (mentioned only)
Umman Kudu
Varota (mentioned only)
Vladimir Harkonnen
Wanna Marcus (mentioned only)
Wellington Yueh
Wensicia Corrino (mentioned only)
Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen's chief Handler
Halleck's Lieutenant
Hawat's lieutenant
Unnamed Atreides Gladiator
Unnamed Atreides Trooper
Unnamed chief Handler
Unnamed escort service woman
Unnamed escort wench
Unnamed Factory Commander
Unnamed Fremen Leader
Unnamed Harkonnen Assassin
Unnamed Sand Worker
Unnamed Gamont Slave-boy
Unnamed Guildsman
Unnamed Harkonnen Slavemaster
Unnamed Manufacturer's Companion
Unnamed Manufacturer's Daughter
Unnamed replacement parts dealer
Unnamed Slave-Concubine
Unnamed Spacing Guild Mentat
Unnamed Sardaukar Commander
Unnamed Sardaukar Officer
Unnamed Sardaukar Soldier
Unnamed Stillsuit manufacturer
Planets and locations
Arrakis
Arrakeen
Sietch Tabr
Great Flat
Imperial Basin
Cave of Riches
Harg Pass
Mount Idaho
Minor Erg
Tuek's Sietch
Tuono Basin
Hagga Basin
Red Chasm
Sihaya Ridge
Arrakeen
Sietch Tabr
Great Flat
Imperial Basin
Cave of Riches
Harg Pass
Mount Idaho
Minor Erg
Tuek's Sietch
Tuono Basin
Hagga Basin
Red Chasm
Sihaya Ridge
Caladan
Giedi Prime
Salusa Secundus
Bela Tegeuse
Chusuk
Ecaz
Grumman
Hagal
Poritrin
Richese
Tleilax
Tupile
Wallach IX
Organizations
Corrino Empire
Bene Gesserit
Combine Honnete Ober Advancer Mercantiles
House Atreides
House Corrino
House Ginaz (mentioned only)
House Harkonnen
House Moritani (mentioned only)
Spacing Guild
Commission of Ecumenical Translators
Titles
Padishah Emperor
Duke
Baron
Na-Baron
Na-Baron
Reverend Mother
Bashar
Saint
Sayyadina
Events
Arrakis Revolt
Siege of Arrakeen
Battle of Arrakeen
Siege of Arrakeen
Battle of Arrakeen
Battle of Corrin (mentioned only)
Butlerian Jihad (mentioned only)
Desert War
War of Assassins of Houses Ginaz and Moritani (mentioned only)
References to the real world
From a historical perspective, many have noted similarities between the events of Dune, in which a foreign-born son of an old colonial order unites disparate and warring tribes of religious desert nomads to win freedom from a decaying Imperial power, and the Arab Revolt of early 20th century Middle Eastern history, in which the British liaison officer T.E. Lawrence mobilized Arab fighters to break the power of the Ottoman Turks in the Arabian peninsula. While there are many striking parallels, one of the most trivial and bizarre may be that in the film adaptations Dune (1984) and Lawrence of Arabia (1962), both characters representing the old Imperial order (Emperor Shaddam IV and the Turkish Bey, respectively), are played by the actor José Ferrer. In his interview with OMNI, Herbert explicitly identified CHOAM with OPEC, equating the spice melange to oil (it should be noted that OPEC did not become notable as a political power until after the publication of the first novel). Parallels can also be drawn to the European/Asian spice trade of early modern Europe and later eras, in particular between the Spacing Guild and the Dutch East India Company.
Another parallel story can be found in Basil Dearden's film Khartoum (1965), with Charlton Heston as General Gordon. The baroque, stylish and brocaded uniforms are very reminiscent of the Caladan ducal-court uniforms used in the first Dune movie. The British Empire sends out Gordon to administer Sudan and its capital Khartoum on behalf of Egypt, aware that this is virtually a suicide mission. Like Leto Atreides, General Gordon, a legendary and formidable warrior of the Empire, goes willingly to his demise. The historical basis of this film lies in the story of the Sudanese supposed Mahdi, Muhammad Ahmad, an Islamic messianic figure that rose to power in the late 19th century. Paul Atreides is referred to as "Mahdi" at one point in the novel and in later novels, particularly Dune Messiah. The Mahdi's jihadist army prevails over the technologically superior British army in Sudan, just as the inspired Fremen defeat the Harkonnen forces and imperial troops.
Another connection exists between the name of house Atreides and the name of the legendary Greek house of Atreus, whose members figure prominently in many Greek tragedies.
These parallels can be pushed too far. In particular, none of them has rebels dethroning the emperor, any parallel to the Bene Gesserit and its program, or to the ecological aspects of the Dune story.
Dune was written shortly after LSD appeared in America as a recreational drug. The psychedelic experience of LSD can be directly related to the altered states of consciousness that the spice Melange can induce.
Allusions/references from other works
After its release, Dune has influenced many other SF works.
In the Japanese anime Last Exile, the theme of nations waging war with a supposedly neutral arbiter strikes a similar parallel to the Dune series. Also, the Claudia fluid and high value of water can also said to be inspired by Dune. More interestingly is the Guild in the series, which bears a similarity (in name and some characteristics) to the Spacing Guild of Dune.
In the science fiction MMORPG Anarchy Online, a hypercorporation called Omni-Tek was granted control of a seemingly useless desert planet called Rubi-Ka. However, Rubi-Ka is the only known source of notum - an extremely valuable mineral. This situation is very similar to that in the Dune novels. There are also Krys knives and giant sandworms in the game.
The song "To Tame a Land" by the heavy metal band Iron Maiden from the album Piece of Mind is based on the novel. Originally, it was going to be called Dune. According to the band's fansite, Frank Herbert's agent relayed his refusal stating that "Frank Herbert doesn't like rock groups. Especially hard rock and especially groups like Iron Maiden."
Various work by heavy metal band Fear Factory contain titles and themes related to Dune, including the song Hunter-Killer on Demanufacture album and the remix album Fear is The Mind Killer.
Comedian Dane Cook references Dune being like Nestlé Nesquik on his cd Harmful If Swallowed on the track Hopped Up On the Q.
The metal band Shai Hulud drew their name from the Fremen word for the sandworms.
The planet Tatooine in the Film series Star Wars is a planet completely covered by desert, and one of the species on the planet, the Tusken Raiders, share some traits with the Fremen (wearing moisture-retaining clothing and masks, living a semi-primitive existence in the desert)
The cartoon SpongeBob SquarePants has an episode referencing Dune where SpongeBob and Sandy track down a ravenous "Alaskan Bull Worm" that is massive in size and length. Near the end of the episode, the two characters ride on the worm's back and at one point, Sandy even mentions finding a "Worm-sign" (Which turns out to be a palm-sized picket sign with the word "worm" written on it).
The song 'Traveler In Time' by the power metal band Blind Guardian from the album Tales from the Twilight World starts with the lyrics 'The Morning Sun of Dune'.
In the video game Star Wars: Jedi Knight: Jedi Academy, one of the optional missions takes place on a desert-like world with giant worms — much like the planet Dune.
On an episode of Futurama, Al Gore claims to have ridden the "Moon Worm."
In the 519th episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 Crow says "we have worm-sign" when a scene with a desert appears on screen. And then later, in the same episode, says "Arrakis, Dune, Desert Planet" the exact words used in the novel.
The heavy metal band Star One released a song on their album Space Metal called "Sandrider".
The song "Painamplifier" by Swedish synthpop band Covenant from the U.S. version of the album Dreams of a Cryotank references the 1984 Dune movie and includes 2 samples from the movie.
The Warhammer 40,000 universe has been heavily inspired by Dune, including references and influences that include:
A weapon called a Lasgun
A guild of psychic, mutated navigators known as the "Navis Nobilite"
A religious prohibition on robotics and artificial intelligence
A galaxy-spanning empire known as "The Imperium", ruled over by a psychic, immortal monarch with the title of "God Emperor" that protects mankind as a whole
An all-female army zealously devoted to said God Emperor
A weapon called a Lasgun
A guild of psychic, mutated navigators known as the "Navis Nobilite"
A religious prohibition on robotics and artificial intelligence
A galaxy-spanning empire known as "The Imperium", ruled over by a psychic, immortal monarch with the title of "God Emperor" that protects mankind as a whole
An all-female army zealously devoted to said God Emperor
Dune is also thought to be an example of the "Hero's Journey" (or "Monomyth") as described by Joseph Campbell.
Canadian musician Grimes released album called Geidi Primes which contains songs with Dune references, such as "Caladan", "Sardaukar Levenbrech", "Feyd Rautha Dark Heart" and "Shadout Mapes".
The British goa-trance project Juno Reactor used several samples from the 1984 Dune movie in the song Rotorblade.
The track 'Weapon of Choice' by the artist Fatboy Slim features the lyrics "Walk without rhythm,it won't attract the worm", apparently referencing the sand worms of Dune.
Awards and nominations
Nebula award for best novel in 1965
Hugo award for best novel 1966 in literature. Joint first place with ...And Call Me Conrad by Roger Zelazny
Film, TV or theatrical adaptations
Dune (1984 film) film adaptation by David Lynch
Frank Herbert's Dune made by the Sci Fi Channel (United States)
Dune (2021 film)
Dune: Part Two second film directed by Denis Villeneuve
Trivia
The original novel, Dune, was rejected by over twenty publishers; it has since become the bestselling science fiction novel of all time, selling more than twelve million copies, including millions more of the five sequels.
Gallery
Covers
References
↑ SCIENCE FICTION IN THE FULLERTON LIBRARY
↑ 2.0 2.1 The Road to Dune
Dune • Dune Messiah • Children of Dune • God Emperor of Dune • Heretics of Dune • Chapterhouse: Dune • Dune 7 (unfinished)
Eye • Songs of Muad'dib • The Road to Dune
Dune: House Atreides • Dune: House Harkonnen • Dune: House Corrino
Dune: The Butlerian Jihad • Dune: The Machine Crusade • Dune: The Battle of Corrin
Hunters of Dune • Sandworms of Dune
Paul of Dune • The Winds of Dune • Princess of Dune • Leto of Dune (cancelled)
Sisterhood of Dune • Mentats of Dune • Navigators of Dune
Dune: The Duke of Caladan • Dune: The Lady of Caladan • Dune: The Heir of Caladan
Songs of Muad'dib • Dreamer of Dune • The Road to Dune • Tales of Dune • Sands of Dune