gom jabbar
Production Information
Type
Owners
Bene GesseritJessica AtreidesGaius Helen Mohiam
Jessica Atreides
Gaius Helen Mohiam
Alia Atreides
Locations
Caladan
Arrakis/Rakis
Physical and Technical Specifications
Shape
The gom jabbar, also known as "the high handed enemy", was a handheld needle tipped with meta-cyanide poison. When driven into a victim, it brought almost instantaneous death.
Contents
1 The gom jabbar Test of Humanity
2 Gallery

2.1 Illustrations
2.2 Apocrypha
2.3 Adaptions
2.1 Illustrations
2.2 Apocrypha
2.3 Adaptions
3 Behind the scenes
4 Appearances
5 References
The gom jabbar Test of Humanity
The Bene Gesserit also made extensive use of the gom jabbar, especially when they tested the "humanity" of certain individuals. In such circumstances, the device was placed against the subject's neck and acted as a deterrent for them backing out of the test. Such a method was used by Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam against Paul Atreides before his arrival on Arrakis.
The gom jabbar test would be to determine whether an individual's awareness was stronger than their instincts. If their awareness of the gom jabbar's presence was strong enough, it would override their instincts to withdraw from the test, which usually involved great physical pain.
Both Mother Superior Darwi Odrade and the She-Seer Sheeana Brugh survived the gom jabbar test.
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptions
Behind the scenes
Gom Jabbar is defined in Terminology of the Imperium as 'The High Handed Enemy'. The etymology of this word (like many others in Dune) almost certainly stems from arabic terms. Gom Jabbar, is a compound of Gôm (قوم) and Jabbâr. Gôm (قوم) is the plural of Gomâny (قوماني), which Travels in Arabia Deserta translates as 'an enemy, adversary'.  Jabbâr is translated as 'high-handed, tyrannical person'. Together, these make 'A high-handed enemy'.
Appearances
Dune
Children of Dune
God Emperor of Dune (mentioned only)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
References
↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Dune - Chapter 1: "I hold at your neck the gom jabbar," she said. "The gom jabbar, the high-handed enemy. "It's a needle with a drop of poison on its tip. Ah-ah! Don't pull away
or you'll feel that poison."... If you withdraw your hand from the box you die. This is the only rule. Keep your hand in the box and live. Withdraw it and die."
↑ 2.0 2.1 Children of Dune - Chapter 15: "I insist that you explain," Jessica said and she fingered the poisoned needle she held beneath a fold of her robe. It was the gom jabbar, so deadly that the slightest prick of it killed within seconds.
↑ 3.0 3.1 Dune - Chapter 47: The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen stood with eyes downcast in the Imperial audience chamber, the oval selamlik within the Padishah Emperor's hutment.... "I'm sorry, Grandfather," Alia said. "You've met the Atreides gom jabbar." She got to her feet, dropped a dark needle from her hand.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: It was a warm night at Castle Caladan, and the ancient pile of stone that had served the Atreides family as home for twenty-six generations bore that cooled- sweat feeling it acquired before a change in the weather.
↑ Dune - Chapter 46: Beyond the ship, the city of Arrakeen lay cold and gleaming in the light of the northern sun.... A single metal hutment, many stories
tall, reached out in a thousand-meter circle from the base of the lighter -- a tent composed of interlocking metal leaves -- the temporary lodging place for five legions of Sardaukar and His Imperial Majesty, the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV.
↑ 6.0 6.1 Dune - Chapter 1
↑ Dune - Terminology of the Imperium: gom jabbar; the high-handed enemy; that specific poison needle tipped with meta-cyanide used by Bene Gesserit Proctors in the death-alternative test of human awareness.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1:  "You've heard of animals chewing off a leg to escape a trap? There's an animal kind of trick. A human would remain in the trap, endure the pain, feigning death that he might kill the trapper and remove a threat to his kind." The itch became the faintest burning. "Why are you doing this?" he demanded. "To determine if you're human. Be silent."
↑ Heretics of Dune - Chapter 40: In the dim light of the museum penthouse, Odrade held up her right
hand, looking at it, remembering the agony box, and the gom jabbar poised at her neck ready to kill her if she flinched or cried out. Sheeana had not cried out, either. But she had known the answer to Odrade's question even before the agony box.
↑ The Etymology of “Gom Jabbar”, Part 2