House Atreides
Status
Atreides Empire
Symbol
Army
FremenFedaykinSardaukar Fish Speakers
Uniform
BlackWhite
Colors
Homeworld
Arrakis
Ruling title
EmperorGod Emperor
House Atreides (/əˈtreɪɪdiːz/) was a respected House Major within the infrastructure of the Galactic Padishah Empire. They were ruled by the patriarch of the Atreides family, who took the title of Duke.
Contents
1 Biography

1.1 Origins
1.2 Homeworld
1.3 Downfall & revival
1.4 Descendants
1.1 Origins
1.2 Homeworld
1.3 Downfall & revival
1.4 Descendants
2 Family Tree
3 Rulers
4 Members
5 Retainers
6 Gallery

6.1 House members
6.2 House retainers
6.3 House symbols
6.4 House troopers & other employees
6.5 House vehicles
6.6 Leitmotifs
6.1 House members
6.2 House retainers
6.3 House symbols
6.4 House troopers & other employees
6.5 House vehicles
6.6 Leitmotifs
7 Trivia
8 References
Biography
Origins
The legend stated that the Atreides family came from a noble family that originated in Greece on Earth, and that they rose to prominence during the Butlerian Jihad. House Atreides specifically claimed descent from King Agamemnon, a son of Atreus, in Greek mythology. The descendants of Atreus are called "Atreides" (plural "Atreidai", Latinized as "Atreidae") in the Greek language. This Royal House included many significant figures in Greek myth.
Homeworld
Up until the latter days of Duke Leto Atreides I, House Atreides maintained the planetary fief of Caladan and had their center of operation on the planet, which they had also ruled for twenty generations. House Atreides had perfected a form of government that resulted in a well-organized society and a spiritually satisfied people. Furthermore, House Atreides kept Caladan a lush, prosperous paradise with relatively low industrial levels, in stark contrast to House Harkonnen's capital, Giedi Prime. However, the House was also proficient in war, maintaining Swordmasters, Warmasters, and Mentats to train and lead their army. House Atreides also developed its own Battle Language.
Downfall & revival
At the request of Padishah Emperor Shaddam Corrino IV, Duke Leto relocated his House to the desert planet Arrakis and took over mining operations of the spice melange from House Harkonnen.
However, Leto was walking into a trap set by an illegal alliance between House Harkonnen and House Corrino. Hawat and the Duke knew as much, but the time frame and scale of the ambush caught them by surprise, along with the betrayal of a trusted Suk doctor bent to Baron Vladimir Harkonnen's will by Twisted Mentat Piter de Vries.
Wellington Yueh's betrayal was double-edged, however, using it as an opportunity to (unsuccessfully) assassinate the Baron with a poison tooth and orchestrate the escape of the Duke's son Paul and concubine Lady Jessica Atreides into the deep desert where they would eventually be intercepted by a Fremen tribe led by Stilgar.
As a result of the Bene Gesserit's Missionaria Protectiva, Jessica assumed influence over the Fremen tribe by drinking the Water of Life — changing her unborn daughter in the process — and becoming their new Reverend Mother, while Paul took up the mantle of their prophesied Mahdi and Lisan al-Gaib.
Two years later, House Corrino was overthrown by Duke Paul Muad'Dib and his unified army of Fremen fanatics after the Padishah Emperor was drawn to Arrakis by Governor Rabban's incompetence in dealing with repeated sabotage of spice production. Through a coerced marriage with Irulan Corrino, Paul became the first Emperor of the Atreides Empire and ruled for 12 years of galactic violence and bloodshed.
Two decades later, Paul's second-born son, Leto Atreides II, became his successor after merging with a colony of sandtrout to extend his own lifespan and guarantee the Golden Path of humanity's survival.
From desert to terraformed paradise, Arrakis remained the homeworld of House Atreides for 35 centuries until its official dissolution.
Descendants
Leto Atreides II's lack of a direct heir, coupled with his decision to dissolve the Atreides Empire after his 35-century life came to an end, saw House Atreides cease to exist as a tangible political power. However, the Atreides bloodline continued through Leto II's twin sister (and legal wife) Ghanima Atreides and her concubine Farad'n Corrino.
One such group of descendants of Ghanima were Leto II's majordomo, Moneo Atreides, and his daughter Siona Atreides. After the bonding of Siona and the latest ghola of Duncan Idaho, the Atreides families continued onward. Because of the invisibility to prescience conferred to their genetic line through Siona, their descendants flourished for over 1,500 years until the Return of the Honored Matres.
According to Leto II's plan, it was impossible to definitively know all of Siona's descendants, as they were immune to prescient vision. Many escaped into obscurity, and more escaped into the Scattering. The Bene Gesserit Sisterhood also maintained multiple Atreides bloodlines within their breeding program, resulting in dozens if not hundreds of descendants (of varying concentration).
By the time of the return from the Scattering, some 5,000 years after the time of Paul Maud'Dib, Supreme Bashar Miles Teg was a descendant of the Atreides, as was his daughter, the Reverend Mother Darwi Odrade, who even bore a time-worn version of the last name. Teg and his daughter were closely watched by Bene Gesserit for any sign of the "wildness" of the Atreides line. This wildness included any sign of them arising to be another super-being, a Kwisatz Haderach. Reverend Mother Lucilla, a key ally of Odrade, was also a descendant of Siona Atreides through a different branch maintained by the Bene Gesserit. Unexpectedly, the wormrider Sheeana Brugh was also revealed to be a descendant of Siona: despite being born into obscure poverty on Rakis, her ability to command the worms (foretold by the God Emperor) led to her to becoming a rising, messianic figure within the sisterhood as well.
Teg was killed at the destruction of Rakis when the Honored Matres attacked and reduced Dune to a charred ball, and Odrade was killed some time later at Junction when the Bene Gesserit attempted to liberate Junction from the Honored Matres. Lucilla was killed in the fall of Lampadas. Sheanna, however, escaped with a ghola-clone of Miles Teg on a no-ship with the new Duncan Idaho ghola, leaving for parts unknown.
Family Tree
Rulers
The Old Duke, nineteenth Duke & Siridar-Governor of Caladan
Leto Atreides I, twentieth Duke & Siridar-Governor of Arrakis
Paul Atreides, twenty-first Duke & first Emperor of the Atreides Empire
Alia Atreides, Regent of the Atreides Empire
Leto Atreides II, twenty-second (and final) Duke & sole God Emperor of the Known Universe
Members
Atreus - (ancient founder)
Agamemnon - (son of Atreus)
Old Duke - (father of Leto I)
Leto Atreides I - (father of Paul & Alia)
Jessica Atreides - (mother of Paul & Alia)
Paul Atreides - (father of Leto II & Ghanima)
Alia Atreides - (daughter of the Late Leto I and Jessica)
Leto Atreides II the Elder - (son of Paul and Chani)
Leto Atreides II - (son of Paul and Chani)
Ghanima Atreides - (daughter of Paul and Chani)
Moneo Atreides - (descendant of Ghanima)
Siona Atreides - (daughter of Moneo)
Retainers
Arkie - (member of Thufir Hawat's unit)
Duncan Idaho - (Swordmaster to Leto I)
Fedor - (Trooper)
Gurney Halleck - (Warmaster to Leto I)
Mattai - (member of Thufir Hawat's unit)
Thufir Hawat - (Mentat to Leto I)
Unnamed Gladiator - (Soldier)
Wellington Yueh - (Suk Doctor to Leto I)
Gallery
House members
House retainers
House symbols
House troopers & other employees
House vehicles
Leitmotifs
These screen adaptations use particular themes or leitmotifs to represent House Atreides:
Trivia
In Frank Herbert's early draft for his first Dune novel, Spice Planet, House Atreides was named House Linkam.
References
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: "I have a message for you to carry to the Emperor," Paul said. And he couched his words in the ancient formula: "I, a Duke of a Great House, an Imperial Kinsman, give my word of bond under the Convention.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 31: I know what alternatives faced my father, though. Leto sighed. To turn his back on his father was like betraying a god. But the Atreides Empireneeded shaking up. It had fallen into the worst of Paul's vision.
↑ 3.0 3.1 3.2 God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 41: Moneo swept his gaze up and down Idaho’s figure, noting the old - fashioned Atreides uniform, black with a red hawk at the breast, the high boots glistening with polish.
↑ Dune - Chapter 12: With reinvestment and growth factors accounted for, including the CHOAM percentage and military costs, our profit margin will be reduced to a very narrow six or seven per cent until we can replace worn-out equipment.
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: "The Fremen have the word of Muad'Dib," Paul said  The old Truthsayer, the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam, had her own view of the hidden meaning in Paul's words now. She glimpsed the jihad and said: "You cannot loose these people upon the universe!"
↑ Dune - Chapter 43: Paul gestured to the Fedaykin. "These men say I'm a ruling Duke. Your own emperor bestowed Arrakis on House Atreides. I am House Atreides." Paul glanced to one of his Fedaykin lieutenants, said: "Korba, how came they to have weapons?"
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 64: "Give them," Ghanima echoed."He'll have them one way or another." Farad'n heard fear for himself in her voice. Love, then? Leto asked not for reason, but for an intuitive leap. "Take them," Farad'n said. "Indeed," Leto said.
↑ God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 15: Several comely Fish Speakers had offered to spend the night with their new commander, but Idaho had rejected them. It was not like the Atreides to use sex as a persuader!  “I’ll want a complete briefing on this rebellion today, but first: why are there no men in Leto’s army?”
↑ 9.0 9.1 Children of Dune - Chapter 21: Idaho lounged in the black-and-green uniform of an Atreides House Guard, no insignia.
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 23: "Why do you wear that old jacket?" she'd demanded, eyeing the black uniform coat with its red hawk crest beneath his Fremen robes. "You're an Emperor!"
↑ God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 5: The Duncan still walked with the spring of youth despite all of his long service. He could thank a minimal ingestion of melange for that. The man wore the old Atreides uniform, black with a golden hawk at the left breast.
↑ God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 7: Moneo wore a white Atreides uniform with no insignia, a subtle comment.
↑ 13.0 13.1 13.2 Dune - Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses): LETO ATREIDES (10,140-10,191)
A distaff cousin of the Corrinos, he is frequently referred to as the Red Duke. House Atreides ruled Caladan as a siridar-fief for twenty generations until pressured into the move to Arrakis
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 17: "You've sired, Sire," Bijaz said, grinning. "You are much more than the base Usul. You're the Atreides Emperor, Paul Muad'dib. And you are my finger." He held up the index finger of his right hand.
↑ God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 10: INQUISITOR: You make the tyrant appear a selfless servant of the people! HWI NOREE: Was that not a prominent characteristic of his Atreides Family?  INQUISITOR: But you have not wasted our time. You are confirmed as Ambassador to the Court of Lord Leto, the God Emperor of the known universe.