Lisan al-Gaib - Voice of the Outer Worlds: Dune: Thunder at Twilight card art by Paolo Parente
Lisan al-Gaib (translated as "Voice from the Outer World" and sometimes "Giver of Water") was the Fremen term for their offworld prophet or messiah.
Little did the Fremen realize that their messianic legends were little more than planted superstitions by the Bene Gesserit Missionaria Protectiva as a means of cultural manipulation for the Sisterhood's benefit.
The arrival of Paul Atreides and his Bene Gesserit mother on Arrakis brought much attention by believers in his role in their prophecy.
The prophecy foretold that the Lisan al-Gaib would 'see through all subterfuge.', which was fulfilled when Paul identified disguised Fremen. It also told that the Lisan al-Gaib 'might be both dead and alive', which was fulfilled when Paul drunk the Water of Life and entered a state between life and death.
Trivia
The Persian poet of mysticism Hafez (1315-1390) was referred to by this same title.
The term may come from the Arabic لسان الغيب (lisaan al-ghaib) or "tongue of the unseen/missing."
Herbert possibly intended to reference the metaphysical Sufi application of الغيب, which has been conjectured to connote the "unseen dimensions of Reality." If so, Lisan al-Gaib may indicate that one is a "prophet" rather than a "foreigner." That said, Herbert rarely drew from extant language or concept without a degree of obfuscation and amalgamation.
It may also reference the word الغريب (al-gariib), meaning "strange(r)," "otherworldly" or "weird" - a connection supported by early Modern English definitions of weird, the Fremen reference to Jessica as a witch, and the fact that Paul defined himself as a "freak" in the wake of his exile from Arrakeen. Taken in combination, Lisan al-Gaib may be understood to mean "that who is alien" (both geographically and physically) and those who speak with supernatural power and insight into the unknown.
It may also reference the word الغريب (al-gariib), meaning "strange(r)," "otherworldly" or "weird" - a connection supported by early Modern English definitions of weird, the Fremen reference to Jessica as a witch, and the fact that Paul defined himself as a "freak" in the wake of his exile from Arrakeen. Taken in combination, Lisan al-Gaib may be understood to mean "that who is alien" (both geographically and physically) and those who speak with supernatural power and insight into the unknown.
See also
Mahdi
References
↑ Dune, Terminology of the Imperium LISAN AL-GAIB: "The Voice from the Outer World." In Fremen messianic legends, an
off-world prophet. Sometimes translated as "Giver of Water."
↑ Dune, "You have a legend of the Lisan al-Gaib here, the Voice from the Outer World, the one who will lead the Fremen to paradise.
↑ Dune, Stilgar said. "But a thing so important must be tested. If you are the Bene Gesserit of the legend whose son will lead us to paradise . . . " He shrugged. Jessica sighed, thinking: So our Missionaria Protectiva even planted religious safety valves all through this hell hole. Ah, well . . . it'll help, and that's what it was meant to do.
↑ Dune, But he was remembering the words of the legend: "The Lisan al-Gaib shall see through all subterfuge."
↑ Dune, "What were Fremen doing on that crawler?" Paul asked... "Who be this lad?"  asked. Halleck moved to place himself between the man and Paul, said: "This is Paul Atreides, the ducal heir." "Why says he there were Fremen on our rumbler?" the man asked. "They fit the description," Paul said. Kynes snorted. "You can't tell Fremen just by looking at them!" He looked at
the Dune man. "You. Who were those men?" "Friends of one of the others," the Dune man said. "Just friends from a village who wanted to see the spice sands." Kynes turned away. "Fremen!"
↑ Dune, And it came to pass in the third year of the Desert War that Paul-Muad'Dib lay alone in the Cave of Birds beneath the kiswa hangings of an inner cell. And he lay as one dead, caught up in the revelation of the Water of Life, his being translated beyond the boundaries of time by the poison that gives life. Thus was the prophecy made true that the Lisan al-Gaib might be both dead and alive.