This article refers to elements from both
Original Dune & The Dune Encyclopedia
Ornithopter illustration by John Schoenherr (1963-1964 serialization, Analog magazine)
The Flight Through the Shield Wall, ornithopter illustration by John Schoenherr (The Illustrated Dune)
Ornithopters, also commonly referred to as 'thopters, were the most common small transport vessels in the Imperium. These aircraft were capable of carrying 6 passengers, 9 if the back seats were removed.
'Thopters were also very versatile. While some types were capable of space travel over short distances,​ these small vessels were mostly operated in planetary atmospheres. Their uses varied from human transport between cities and continents, to light cargo transport across long distances.
'Thopters were often used for military purposes and equipped with weaponry. Usually these weapons were lasguns, but they could also carry small missiles and repeating maula pistols. With the exception of the planet Arrakis, and for heavier cargo transportation, most ornithopters were equipped with shields.
Most 'thopters were winged vessels that were capable of flight through jet propulsion, as well as by mimicking the movements of birds. While the jets were the primary propulsion system, the wings assisted in maintaining altitude, as well as maneuvered the vessels.
Carryalls were essentially large ornithopters.
Contents
1 Alternate canon

1.1 Dune Encyclopedia
1.1 Dune Encyclopedia
2 Expanded Dune
3 Known Models
4 Gallery

4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
5 Videos

5.1 Behind the scenes videos
5.2 Real world context
5.1 Behind the scenes videos
5.2 Real world context
6 External links
Alternate canon
Dune Encyclopedia
The first ornithopters were built in 7585 BG by a team of scientists being held as political prisoners of the abortive Thinkers' Rebellion of 7600 BG by Emperor Neweh. Their head was Jehane Golitle tasked to earn her team's continued well-being by inventing useful devices which would make a profit for the emperor.
As the team scoured Imperial Scientific Archives in a desperate search for obsolete inventions, Golitle sought a method of constructing a flying machine that could combine the versatility of a bird with the size of an artificial aircraft. She discovered the secret she sought in the Heart Scallop.
Golitle removed her entire research facility to the Forannis Triad and began intensive experimentation, culminating in 7580 BG, with the test flight of the first true ornithopter.
Ornithopters faced considerable resistance when first introduced, since the piloting of one was quite different from the flying of fixed-wing craft. Emperor Neweh, was distressed with the slow acceptance of the ornithopter.
One of the earliest sport ornithopterists was Ibrahim Vaughn Holtzman, who was seriously injured in a crash of an early model in 7565 BG. The Imperial Pilots Guild refused to admit members on the basis of ornithopter flight-time until 7520 BG and many systems refused to permit ornithopters to be used as anything but sport or commuter vehicles.
Acceptance eventually with the Butlerian Jihad, and its proscription of complicated machinery. This advanced the simple, effective ornithopter and by 7000 BG, they were the favored mode of airborne transports to rule the sky of most planets.
The basic element of the common ornithopter is the installation at the wing-junctures of a domesticated, specially bred Heart Scallop which is connected to a series of electrical leads.
The electrical currents have two purposes:
One line is used to shock the bivalve into dormancy when the pilot  wishes to utilize fixed-wing flight (normally jet-assisted). When the power is disconnected, the Heart Scallop immediately resumes pulsing, thus providing the ornithopter with a certain amount of fail-safe capacity.
The other line in the electrical system is connected to the mollusk's nerve centers, and, when engaged, causes the Heart Scallop to increase its pulsation rate by an amount which varies with the intensity of the current.
This is seldom used except when the pilot wishes to brake rapidly or wishes to take off from a constricted site.
The efficiency of the ornithopter's "engine" is difficult to surpass. The scallops need very little maintenance. They must be periodically re-trimmed to prevent them from growing beyond the constraints of their installation pods, but the connections between the mollusk and the aircraft assembly are remarkably durable, since the animal treats the wing and body of the ornithopter as if those structures were its own shell. The scallops need no fuel, since they strain the air they fly through (though good maintenance procedure mandates allowing the creatures to continue to function even when the ornithopter is not in use — a point which occurred late to ornithopter manufacturers who did not use detachable wings on the earlier models).
The major repair and maintenance problems associated with ornithopters are the wing gears and joints, which are complicated ball-and-socket connections, and structural problems arising from the switchover from bird-like flight, which requires flexible wings for optimum performance, to fixed-wing flight, which requires rigid structures.
Expanded Dune
Known Models
Ornithopters could appear in many different types including tiny scout or unmanned drone variants, big armored models as well and large carrier wings and troop-carriers.
Aerial searchers
Armored thopters
Cargo ornithopters
Command thopters
Crone ornithopters
Escort thopters or smaller guard ships
Flitter thopters
Guard ships
Gun thopter
Hawk planes
Mortuary thopters
Orships
Racing thopters
spotter controls
Scout thopters
Troop-carriers
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptations
Videos
Behind the scenes videos
Videos on the portrayal of ornithopters in adaptations of the Dune series.
Real world context
Videos on the real world context of the subject, showcasing real world inspirations for this element of the Dune universe.
External links
Ornithopter article at Technovelgy.com
Cite error: <ref> tags exist for a group named "citation needed", but no corresponding <references group="citation needed"/> tag was found