This page was made a Featured Article
View the archived version here
Paul Atreides
Aliases
Usul
Muad'Dib
The Preacher
The Mentat Emperor
Political Information
Titles
Duke
Kwisatz Haderach
Mahdi
Lisan al Gaib
Padishah Emperor
Truthsayer
Tenure
Predecessor
Successor
Great House
Affiliation and Relationships
Family members
Irulan Corrino † (wife)
Chani Kynes †  (concubine)
Tanidia Nerus † (maternal grandmother)
Vladimir Harkonnen † (maternal grandfather)
Unnamed paternal grandfather †
Jessica Atreides † (mother)
Leto Atreides I † (father)
Alia Atreides † (sister)
Leto Atreides II the Elder † (son)
Leto Atreides II † (son)
Ghanima Atreides † (daughter)
Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen † (first cousin once removed)
Glossu Rabban † (first cousin once removed)
Romances
Irulan Corrino † (wife)
Chani Kynes † (concubine)
Biographical Information
Born
Place of birth
Education
Lady Jessica
Wellington Yueh
Thufir Hawat
Gurney Halleck
Duncan Idaho
Died
Place of death
Resting place
Military Information
Weapons
Rapier
Crysknife
Commands
Fedaykin
Atreides Empire
Battles/Wars
Amtal duel with Jamis
Desert WarBattle of ArrakeenDuel with Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen
Battle of Arrakeen
Duel with Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen
Muad'Dib's Jihad
Physical Characteristics
Eyes
Hair
Height
Paul Atreides (10176 A.G. - 10219 A.G.), predominantly known as Muad'Dib (also called Usul by the Fremen and The Atreides Bastard by the Bene Gesserit) was the last Duke of the noble House Atreides. The only son of Duke Leto Atreides and Bene Gesserit Sister Lady Jessica, he rose to power among the native Fremen on Arrakis in their efforts against the brutal occupation of House Harkonnen. His natural clairvoyant abilities were greatly enhanced by the spice melange, and he used his mother's knowledge of Bene Gesserit propaganda to embody the role of Fremen prophet Lisan al-Gaib.
Their allied victory in the Desert War ousted Emperor Shaddam IV from the Golden Lion Throne, which became the seat of a new Atreides Empire. Paul ruled through twelve years of interstellar bloodshed and oppression before abdicating his throne and exiling himself into the deep desert after losing his eyes and his Fremen lover to the growing conspiracy against his reign.
Nine years later, Paul was succeeded by his surviving son, Leto Atreides II, God Emperor of the Known Universe.
Contents
1 Biography

1.1 Family lineage
1.2 Early life (10176-10191)
1.3 Desert War (10191-10193)

1.3.1 Move to Arrakis
1.3.2 With Kynes & Idaho
1.3.3 Alliance with the Fremen
1.3.4 Battle of Arrakeen


1.4 As Emperor (10196-10210)

1.4.1 Conspiracy
1.4.2 Death of Chani
1.4.3 Exile into the desert


1.5 As the Preacher (10210-10219)

1.5.1 Death
1.1 Family lineage
1.2 Early life (10176-10191)
1.3 Desert War (10191-10193)

1.3.1 Move to Arrakis
1.3.2 With Kynes & Idaho
1.3.3 Alliance with the Fremen
1.3.4 Battle of Arrakeen
1.3.1 Move to Arrakis
1.3.2 With Kynes & Idaho
1.3.3 Alliance with the Fremen
1.3.4 Battle of Arrakeen
1.4 As Emperor (10196-10210)

1.4.1 Conspiracy
1.4.2 Death of Chani
1.4.3 Exile into the desert
1.4.1 Conspiracy
1.4.2 Death of Chani
1.4.3 Exile into the desert
1.5 As the Preacher (10210-10219)

1.5.1 Death
1.5.1 Death
2 Description
3 Abilities
4 Name

4.1 Etymology
4.2 Titles
4.1 Etymology
4.2 Titles
5 Quotes
6 Gallery

6.1 Illustrations
6.2 Apocrypha
6.3 Adaptations
6.1 Illustrations
6.2 Apocrypha
6.3 Adaptations
7 Trivia
8 Appearances
9 References
Quick Answers
Biography
Family lineage
House Atreides was an ancestral and wealthy House Major in the Landsraad, tracing their lineage back thousands of years to King Agamemnon, a son of Atreus in Greece on Old Earth. The Atreides had a long-standing feud with House Harkonnen dating back ten thousand years to the Battle of Corrin. The family kept their ancestral world of Caladan a lush, prosperous paradise with relatively low industrial levels, in stark contrast to the Harkonnen capital of Giedi Prime. However, the Atreides were also proficient in war; they maintained Swordmasters, Warmasters and Mentats to train and lead their army, and had even developed their own Battle Language.
The Bene Gesserit Sisterhood brought Paul's parents, Duke Leto Atreides and Jessica Nerus, who was secretly the natural daughter of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, together in 10175 A.G., with the intention of producing an Atreides daughter who could then mate with Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen to produce the Kwisatz Hadarach the Sisterhood had long prepared for. However, the Bene Gesserit plans were thrown into disarray when Jessica, due to her deep love of the Duke Leto, bore a male heir, Paul, to his House rather than a girl.
Early life (10176-10191)
Paul grew up with a privileged background on the water-rich planet of Caladan, the ancestral Atreides home. Though he lacked companions his own age, he received tutelage from his teachers — men like Thufir Hawat, Duncan Idaho, Gurney Halleck and Dr. Wellington Yueh — as well as deep education in Bene Gesserit methods and techniques from his mother. Shortly after his fifteenth birthday in the year 10191 A.G., Paul's father revealed to him that his training, through his teachers, had been geared toward turning Paul into a mentat. The theory was that when Paul succeeded his father as Duke of House Atreides, one of the most respected and moral Great Houses of the Imperium, a mentat-duke would truly be a formidable force in the Landsraad. Paul's latent talents also earned him the attention of the Bene Gesserit, who tested him with the Gom Jabbar, as they hoped to salvage their breeding program through him.
Desert War (10191-10193)
Jessica and Paul meeting with Mohiam at the Castle Caladan
Paul accompanied his parents when House Atreides relocated to the desert world of Arrakis to manage mining operations of the spice melange. Before their departure, Gaius Helen Mohiam, Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother and the Emperor's Truthsayer, tested him with the gom jabbar. The test was to discover whether Paul was "truly human" by trial of pain, using a small box that Paul placed his hand inside. The pain inflicted on Paul was caused by nerve induction and clearly drained an incredible amount of energy from the Reverend Mother, since no male or female child had ever withstood that much physical pain before.
After a supposed assassination on Paul using a hunter-seeker, Dr. Yueh lowered the defensive house shields and used sedative drugs to disable Leto, Paul, and Jessica, leaving the Atreides leaderless and disorganized under the Harkonnen and Sardaukar military onslaught in the Siege of Arrakeen. The Atreides army was crushed, with only a few remnants managing to escape. This attack marked the beginning of the War. Paul and Jessica were sent into the desert to die. Because of the use of Truthsayers in the Empire, the Baron Harkonnen needed to be able to say truthfully that he was not (directly) responsible for their deaths. However, this plan was foiled by arrangements made by Yueh (he hated the Baron and wished to at least save Paul and Jessica) and Paul and Jessica managed to kill their captors and escape into the desert.
Paul and Jessica initially met up with Imperial Planetologist Dr. Liet-Kynes and Swordmaster Duncan Idaho, hiding in a botanical testing station abandonded long ago. However, they were not there long before the station was attacked by Sardaukar, who kill Duncan. Paul and Jessica fled to the deep desert in an ornithopter, parting ways with Dr. Kynes. They let the Harkonnens think they had died from a coriolis storm.
In the deep desert, under the pressure of extreme circumstances and the increased doses of Spice that he had been ingesting simply by living on Arrakis, some of Paul's powers came into fruition, and his ability to see possible futures exploded into awareness. He saw many things: a way out of his situation, and the restoration of the Atreides, if only he could make contact with the native Fremen and survive.
After a dangerous crossing of the desert, Paul and Jessica managed to meet up with a troop of Fremen. Paul and Jessica proved their worth by disarming Fremen in unarmed combat, aided by Bene Gesserit prana-bindu training – the "Weirding Way" – and the Fremen leader Stilgar gladly accepted them into his troop because he sought to add Paul's skill to the Fremen people. Paul also met a young woman, Chani, daughter of Liet-Kynes, whom he had long seen in his dreams. During this scuffle, Paul disarmed a proud Fremen, Jamis, who took offence at this "presumptuous" youth, and challenged Paul to a fight to the death. Although at first unwilling to kill, he triumphed easily, making his name in the tribe, and also succeeding to the position of head of the household of the dead man. Stilgar gave Paul the name Usul – meaning "the strong base of a pillar" – as his private name within the troop; Paul gave himself the name "Paul Muad'Dib" as his public Fremen name.
When they returned to the troop's sietch, they discovered that the Fremen Reverend Mother was near death, and with the fortuitous arrival of Jessica, a Bene Gesserit, they made Jessica their Sayyadina. Jessica, not realizing the consequences of what the Fremen were about to do, accepted to cement her place in the tribe. Halfway through the process, she realized that she had made a grave mistake: she was involved in a process nearly identical to how the Bene Gesserit made their own Reverend Mothers who could see genetic memories. Jessica realized that the baby in her womb, fathered by Leto before his death, would also go through the process. This had dangerous consequences, because it was a Bene Gesserit teaching that any such baby would not have the strength to withstand the memories of its ancestors.
By 10193 A.G., two years later, Paul had become something of a religious leader among the Fremen. Chani became his lover and bore him a son, whom he called Leto. He and his mother trained the Fremen of Sietch Tabr and other Fremen who sought out Paul in his religious guise, in the Weirding Way, the Bene Gesserit's prana-bindu fighting techniques. Under his leadership his "Fedaykin" experienced victory after victory against the Harkonnens, and Paul's prestige and aura among the Fremen grew. However, in order to be truly accepted by the Fremen he had to become a sandrider. Paul attempted it and succeeded, becoming a full member of the sietch.
The same day, a band of smugglers sought melange too deep in the desert, and the Fremen of Sietch Tabr sprung a trap. In the middle of the battle Paul recognized his weapons teacher, Gurney Halleck, and called on him and his men to surrender. Gurney was overjoyed and overwhelmed in equal measure. He surrendered his men, and joined Paul's service. Among Gurney's men, however, were some Imperial spies who attempted to kill Paul. They were unsuccessful, and they were captured by the Fedaykin. Paul gave secret orders for the spies to be allowed to escape, so that they would reveal that Paul Atreides still lived on Arrakis. Taking advantage of recruiting Gurney Halleck, Paul used the moment to solve his leadership problem. Since he had become a wormrider many of his followers had expected him to challenge Stilgar, his greatest friend among the Fremen, in order to take control of Sietch Tabr. But Paul broke tradition and in doing so forced Stilgar to do the same, managing to sidestep this issue by proclaiming himself the ruling Duke of Arrakis, and thus took power without killing his friend.
Upon returning to Sietch Tabr, Gurney was shocked to discover that Jessica was still alive, as he believed that she was the one who betrayed the Atreides and that Paul did not know. Gurney was about to kill her when Paul walked in, managed to stop him, and explained that Yueh was the traitor. Gurney was almost broken by his nearly fatal and tragic error, but Jessica forgave him and he was bound even further into Atreides and Jessica's service.
Paul's power among the Fremen grew, but he was still frustrated. He was not all he could be; he could not control his journeys into the future, and much of it was still blank to him. So he took a truly risky step and consumed a tiny amount of spice essence, and so attempted to perform the male equivalent of the Reverend Mother ceremony. At this point in time, no male had survived this experience, and it seemed that Paul had initially failed, as he fell into a coma. Paul neglected to tell anyone what he is doing, and many people thought him dead, although others, primarily the Fedaykin, believed him to be in a religious trance. His mother, Jessica, did all she could to wake him, but she ultimately failed. Out of desperation, she called upon Chani from the deep desert to help Paul. Chani, through her more personal knowledge of Paul's dreams and desires, realized what a mad thing Paul had done, and used the converted spice essence in order to bring him out of his trance. For Paul, however, no time had passed, and he gloried in his new memories and powers — telling his mother and Chani immediately that the Emperor himself was currently orbiting the planet with many Sardaukar, ready to attack. He had proven the Bene Gesserit wrong: he was the Kwisatz Haderach, appearing one generation ahead of the prediction. He declared that it was now time to destroy the Harkonnens.
Fremen attacks on the Harkonnens had already managed to almost entirely stop the flow of the spice from Arrakis. This forced the Emperor to act, and he came to Arrakis with all of his Sardaukar, and also levied of all the other noble houses, to annihilate the Fremen if necessary in order to get the spice flowing again. At this point, the Emperor was aware of who Muad'Dib was. In advance of his arrival, he sent a large Sardaukar force into the deep desert for information. Attacking a sietch, they managed to kill Paul's son and capture Alia – Paul's sister – but were ultimately driven off by Fremen women, elderly, and children.
Paul administers the Oath of the Fedaykin
After the Emperor himself had landed, Paul launched the final attack. Using the House Atreides' family atomics (nuclear weapons) that his men managed to retrieve after the Harkonnen attack, he blew a hole in the Shield Wall that protected the capital city of Arrakeen from the surrounding desert and its fierce storms. By using the weapons this way, he narrowly avoided contravening the universal ban against using atomics on people, which would have required the other noble houses to retaliate with "planetary annihilation." The Fremen attacked under cover of a huge desert storm, riding sandworms from the desert through the hole in the Shield Wall. The great static force of the sandstorm then shorted out all of the Sarduakar's defensive shields. The Sardaukar were unable to withstand the full force of the Fremen, caught as they were in total surprise, and the Emperor was forced to surrender. The combined forces of the Landsraad still loomed in orbit around the planet, but Paul threatened to destroy the Spice if any of them were to try to land, and they backed off. In the surprise of Muad'Dib's attack, Alia managed to escape, and in the process killed Baron Harkonnen.
Paul defeats Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen in combat
Realizing that Muad'Dib was not simply some mad Fremen religious leader changed the situation dramatically for the Emperor. Feyd-Rautha, Baron Vladimir Harkonnen's nephew and an acclaimed gladiator, challenged Paul to single combat — claiming rights of kanly as had been declared by Paul's father Leto. Paul agreed even knowing that it is possible he would die, but after a difficult fight during which Feyd-Rautha attempted treachery in the form of a poisoned knife and needle, Paul eventually triumphed.
As Emperor (10196-10210)
Paul, refusing to submit to the Emperor, forced him from the throne by the simple expedience of taking power from the real rulers of the Empire – the Spacing Guild – who controlled space travel. He again threatened to destroy the spice if they did not ship all the troops home. The Spacing Guild had no choice (their limited powers of prophecy showed Paul capable of it) so they sent everyone home. The Emperor abdicated and retired to Salusa Secundus in 10196 A.G. Paul consequently married the Emperor's eldest daughter, Irulan, and assumed control of the Empire. Irulan later wrote extensively on the subject of Muad'Dib, having nothing of him but knowledge of his lifestyle and patterns of thought. Paul then sent a Fremen jihad across the known universe.
Upon crowning himself Emperor in 10196, Paul enacted a strategy that had been revealed to him through his prescient abilities. This decision saw the theology (and many customs) of the Fremen thrust into the whole of the Empire. A result of this action was that Paul Atreides himself became a revered god-head on many worlds in the Known Universe. There was resistance, and Paul found himself increasingly isolated from his family and friends as he decided that the Jihad to implement his vision of mankind's future must be bloodthirsty and relentless. Whole planets were sterilized as some of the Great Houses put up a struggle against Paul's relentless Fremen armies.
After the bloody Jihad ended, Emperor Paul-Muad'Dib Atreides eventually subdued all outright rebellion. The order of the Known Universe was maintained through the replacement of Corrino imperial power, which was supported by Sardaukar military strength; with Atreides imperial power, supported by Fremen military strength.
Paul's interpretation of his prescient visions also necessitated that Arrakis be transformed from a barren desert planet into a lush and fertile world, with the exception of a small desert for the sandworm to remain alive and keep producing spice. By the end of his rule this plan was well on its way to succeeding. This program had begun under Pardot Kynes as an attempt to harness a planet; however, under Paul, it became part of a plan to save humanity.
Paul witnesses the destruction caused by the Stone burner
Despite his strong leadership and formidable prescient abilities, Emperor Paul Atreides began to feel building pressure from discordant groups within the Empire — most notably the Bene Gesserit, Bene Tleilax, Spacing Guild, fringe groups within the Fremen, and the exiled House Corrino. Among their schemes was the detonation of a stone burner in Arrakeen, which resulted in the dissolution of Paul's eyes. Upon his recovery from this incident, he shocked his subjects with the unfazed ability to perceive the world around him through prescience alone.
Despite having the power to view his present surroundings, doubts began to surface in Paul's mind regarding his interpretation of the future. Feeling increasingly frustrated and beyond control, he began to seek a way out. That escape route emerged through the combined treachery of his enemies — a plot conceived in the cloaking presence of a powerful Guild Navigator. Their victory apparently hinged on a Tleilaxu ghola of Duncan Idaho — now a Mentat named Hayt — who contained a secret trigger.
Concurrently, as part of a Corrino and Bene Gesserit plot to deprive Emperor Paul Atreides of illegitimate heirs and potential threats to the Sisterhood's breeding program, Princess Irulan slowly destroyed Chani's fertility by feeding her contraceptives without her knowledge. In desperation, Chani adopted a spice-heavy diet to restore her ability to become pregnant, with eventual success. This was traumatic on her metabolism, however, and the Emperor's Consort died during childbirth, causing Paul to go blind with grief and utter Hayt's trigger phrase: "She is gone."
Now overcome by his Tleilaxu conditioning to assassinate Muad'Dib, Hayt fought to stay his hand and preserve his Emperor's life. As the Tleilaxu had hoped, this caused a turbulent conflict within the ghola, thereby unlocking his past identity and loyalty to House Atreides, becoming Duncan Idaho once again.
Predicting Chani's eventual demise and Duncan's restoration, the Face Dancer Scytale, posing as Chani's handmaid, sprung into action and held the newborn twins at knifepoint. Besides the success of unlocking a new form of immortality for his Tleilaxu masters, Scytale used this opportunity to strike a bargain with Paul, offering to resurrect his loved one - both physically and mentally — for a heavy price: House Atreides would have to abdicate the throne and relinquish their CHOAM holdings. Although tempted beyond measure, Paul killed Scytale with the help of his newborn son's shared vision.
Paul exiles himself into the desert
After the birth of his children, Ghanima and Leto II, Paul was convinced he had lost his prescient powers: he only foresaw the birth of his daughter, and he could no longer view the world around him. Therefore, as no more than a blind Fremen, Paul disappeared into the deep desert, offering himself up to Shai-Hulud in honor of Fremen custom for the blind. This action made a powerful statement: it signified to his people that Paul's interest was for the tribe, and that even he - Usul, Paul who was Muad'Dib - was not above Fremen law.
As the Preacher (10210-10219)
The Preacher and Assan Tariq
Many years after his apparent death alone in the desert, and while the Atreides Empire was under the regency of his younger sister Alia Atreides, a new figure, The Preacher, appeared from the deep desert. By urging civil disobedience against the Atreides Empire, and warning of the consequences of a green Arrakis, The Preacher attracted an ever increasing number of followers. Many believed this thundering blind stranger to be Paul Atreides, as he was blind and led by a boy.
The Preacher eventually revealed himself to his son Leto, and the two of them travelled throughout Arrakis, breaching the water storage of every sietch so that it would spill out onto the sand. Eventually Leto and the Preacher returned to Arrakeen to confront Alia, who had clearly shown herself to be Abomination by this time. Eventually rising tensions saw Alia commit suicide in front of her mother and Leto. During the ensuing chaos, The Preacher was assassinated in Arrakeen, but not before he had revealed beyond a doubt to Gurney Halleck and Jessica that he was indeed Paul Atreides.
Thus, the great Paul Atreides, son of Leto the Just and the first Atreides to ascend to the Golden Lion Throne since its inception more than ten thousand years prior, was dead, passing into legend for eons to come, laying the way forward for his son to take the Golden Path to its logical conclusion. While Paul envisioned the Golden Path, the ultimate transformation that would see his humanity dissolve into a sandworm frightened him. Upon revealing himself to his son, Paul confessed that his desire to maintain his humanity, and the fear of abject loneliness that the Golden Path would bring, were too much for him. He related that he walked away from what he knew he had to do, and admired but lamented for his son who had taken on the mantle that would see humanity restored, but at the cost of his own.
Description
In his youth, Paul was a small boy with an oval face, with tousled coal-colored hair and green eyes. After his time among the Fremen, he grew to be a stringy whipcord of a youth, not as desiccated as the Arrakeen natives, but with ribs there to count, and sunken in the flanks so that the ripple and gather of muscles could be followed under the leathery skin. His oval face was like his mother Jessica's, but he had stronger bones and a browline reminiscent of his maternal grandfather. He had a thin, disdainful nose, long lashes concealing lime-toned, directly staring green eyes, and a hardness in the expression like the old Duke, his paternal grandfather.
Intense, quiet and principled, growing up as a Duke's son meant he was educated in everything from melee combat to basic ecology, but Duke Leto also emphasized the personal qualities of an ideal leader: fair, humble and decisive.
Abilities
Prescience: As the Kwisatz Haderach long sought out for by the breeding programme of the Bene Gesserit Order, Paul possessed a powerful ability to bridge space and time with prescient ability. From an early age, he experienced visions in his dreams which were reported to the Sisterhood by his mother Jessica and was known to have had visions that were accurate, penetrating, and defied four-dimensional explanation. This was one of the key attributes that made them first suspect him being their long-awaited Kwisatz Haderach achieved early. Upon the arrival of House Atreides on Arrakis, Paul's prescient ability was strengthened by the spice melange he constantly inhaled, and it grew greatest during his alliance with the Fremen people, when he first forsaw the jihad that would be waged across the Known Universe in his name, and began to try and avert it. By the end of his reign, Paul's prescience was so powerful that when he lost his eyesight due to a Tleilaxu stone burner, he could interact with the world around him without aid. This was because he was able to remember all the details of his vision of the future. Essentially, Paul knew where everyone would be and what they would say and do. While this helped him in many situations, it was also ultimately his downfall as he was helpless to prevent his future.
Weirding Way: Paul was trained by his mother in the Weirding Way of the Bene Gesserit, allowing him to maneuver around and strike an opponent at unimaginable speeds. When first encountering Sietch Tabr this saved his life, as he was able to overcome the Fremen who saught to kill him and Jessica for their water by means of the Weirding Way. He later taught the Way to many of the Fremen across Arrakis, making them into skilled and deadly Fedaykin by these means, and this was a key factor in his victory in the Battle of Arrakeen.
Voice: At the time the Atreides landed on Arrakis, Paul was also developing the audio-neuro control mechanism of Voice used by the Sisterhood to achieve complete control over a reciever. He demonstrated his emerging talent in this field when, after the decimation of the Atreides and the capture of him and his mother into an ornithopter, he used the Voice to order a Harkonnen agent to remove Jessica's gag so that she could use it even more effectively against him, and thus saving both their lives.
Prana-bindu control: Paul was taught by the supreme control of nerve and muscles known to the Bene Gesserit as prana-bindu by Jessica, which laid the foundations for his use of the Weirding Way and allowed him to gain a higher control over his body which would come to his advantage at many points in his life.
Swordfighting: In addition to the Bene Gesserit techniques taught to him by his mother for his survival, Paul became a skilled swordfighter after years of training by his chief Atreides teachers, the renowned Swordmaster Duncan Idaho and Gurney Halleck, who he nearly bested shortly before the move to Arrakis. This proved to be a vital skill, as he employed it not only to best Jamis after he declared amtal during his early years in Sietch Tabr, but later to kill his cousin, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen, another skilled fighter, in a kanly duel at the time of his ascension to Emperor.
Mentat training: For the first fifteen years of his life, much of Paul's training, through his teachers, had been geared toward turning Paul into a Mentat by order of his father Duke Leto. The theory was that when Paul succeeded his father as the Duke of the Atreides, one of the most respected and moral Great Houses of the Imperium, a Mentat-Duke would truly be a formidable force in the Landsraad. He became a fully fledged "true" Mentat after first escaping the Harkonnens with his mother, and the high level Mentat abilities he gained at that time would help him at many points in his life, including helping handle the data of the battles of his jihad and allowing him to piece together the nature of the conspiracies which were aimed against him more quickly than he could have otherwise.
Endurance: Paul's unusual endurance, especially for a male, was noted by Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam when she tested him with a gom jabbar, a test which he passed through this skill. She noted that he surmounted more agony in the test than any other human of record.
Name
Etymology
Paul's surname, that of his family of House Atreides, meant "son of Atreus" in Greek, due to the Atreides' descent from Agamemnon, Orestes' father and the son of Atreus.
The name Muad'Dib, given by Stilgar after Paul bested Jamis in amtal, was taken from the Fremen name for the kangaroo mouse of the Arrakis desert. While he originally called himself Paul-Muad'Dib after accepting this name, as to not completely remove the name given by his father, this did not become a common name and by his time as Emperor he was generally called only Muad'Dib. While this was the open way to refer to Paul, it was also decided after Jamis' death that the private name used within the sietch would be Usul, meaning "the strength of the base of the pillar" in the Fremen language. He was also called Abu Dhur or Abu d'Dhur.
Titles
In addition to being the Kwisatz Haderach long sought for by the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood, Paul was known as both the Lisan al-Gaib and the Mahdi to the Fremen. The vanquished of his jihad called him the Tyrant, a title which would later be used more widely to describe his son, the God Emperor, after his assassination. In his nine years as a nameless blind Fremen after walking into the desert, Paul was known by the title of the Preacher in absence of any name that could be given to him. He was given the postthumous title of the Mentat Emperor by the Mahdi Spirit Cult. He was given the title of Father of the Indefinite Roads of Time while being called Abu Dhur by Stilgar and later his son Leto II, who also called him the Fil-Haquiqa and The Reality.
Quotes
"Remove her gag." - Using the Voice to escape capture - Dune
"'Who is there here to say I'm not the rightful ruler on Arrakis? Must I prove it by leaving every Fremen tribe in the erg without a leader? Will I subtract from our strength when we need it most?  I am your ruler, and I say to you that it is time we stopped killing off our best men and started killing our real enemies -- the Harkonnens!"' - Rallying his Fremen hoards - Dune
"Silence! I remember your gom jabbar, You remember mine. I can kill you with a word." - Cowing the Emperor's Truthsayer into submission - Dune
"'Statistics: at a conservative estimate, I've killed sixty-one billion, sterilized ninety planets, completely demoralized five hundred others. I've wiped out the followers of forty religions which had existed since..." - Estimating the casualties of the Jihad - Dune Messiah
"'There are some things no one can bear. I meddled in all the possible futures I could create until, finally, they created me. There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers, Nothing. Nothing can be done." - Final words to Duncan Idaho before exiling himself to the desert - Dune Messiah
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptations
Trivia
In the short story Spice Planet, which evolved into Dune, Paul was called Barri Linkam. Barri was not the protaganist. Rather, Duke Leto Atreides' equivalent, Jesse Linkam was the main character instead.
Alejandro Jodorowsky wanted his then 12-year-old son Brontis Jodorowsky to star as Paul in his unmade Dune adaptation.
According to novelist Brian Herbert, Frank Herbert's son and biographer, House Atreides was based on the heroic but ill-fated Greek mythological House Atreus. Noting that the characters in Dune fit mythological archetypes, Brian Herbert wrote that "Paul is the hero prince on a quest who weds the daughter of a 'king'". A primary theme of Dune and its sequels is Frank Herbert's warning about society's tendencies to "give over every decision-making capacity" to a charismatic leader. He said in 1979, "The bottom line of the Dune trilogy is: beware of heroes. Much better rely on your own judgment, and your own mistakes." He wrote in 1985, "Dune was aimed at this whole idea of the infallible leader because my view of history says that mistakes made by a leader (or made in a leader's name) are amplified by the numbers who follow without question." In a 1970 interview, Herbert noted that the character of Paul was constructed to express "the conflict between absolutes and the necessity of the moment". Brian Herbert wrote:Paul Atreides (who is the messianic "Muad'Dib" to the Fremen) resembles Lawrence of Arabia (T. E. Lawrence), a British citizen who led Arab forces in a successful desert revolt against the Turks during World War I. Lawrence employed guerrilla tactics to destroy enemy forces and communication lines, and came close to becoming a messiah figure for the Arabs. This historical event led Frank Herbert to consider the possibility of an outsider leading native forces against the morally corrupt occupiers of a desert world, in the process becoming a godlike figure to them.The similarity to T.E. Lawrence was reinforced within the novel Dune Messiah, in which a chapter heading-quotation is taken from a post-conquest work of Paul's, with the title The Seven Pillars of the Universe. This appears to have been inspired by Lawrence's account of his war-time activities in the desert, titled Seven Pillars of Wisdom.
Paul Atreides (who is the messianic "Muad'Dib" to the Fremen) resembles Lawrence of Arabia (T. E. Lawrence), a British citizen who led Arab forces in a successful desert revolt against the Turks during World War I. Lawrence employed guerrilla tactics to destroy enemy forces and communication lines, and came close to becoming a messiah figure for the Arabs. This historical event led Frank Herbert to consider the possibility of an outsider leading native forces against the morally corrupt occupiers of a desert world, in the process becoming a godlike figure to them.
Throughout Paul's rise to superhuman status, he follows a plotline common to many stories describing the birth of a hero. He has unfortunate circumstances forced onto him, and after a long period of hardship and exile, he confronts and defeats the source of evil in his tale. As such, Dune is representative of a general trend beginning in 1960s American science fiction in that it features a character who attains godlike status through scientific means. Paul's riding and controlling a giant sandworm cements him as a Fremen leader, and he eventually gains a level of omniscience which leads to his accession to the Imperial throne and causes the Fremen to worship him like a god.
The Egyptian-Canadian commentator Khalid M. Baheyeldin has enumerated the obviously Islamic concepts and references appearing in Dune, to the level of finding multiple similarities between the career of Herbert's Paul Atreides and that of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Beyond the obvious general resemblance - both Muhammad and Atreides found a powerful new religion, energizing hitherto disregarded desert-dwellers to topple an old empire and build a new one - Baheyeldin noted various specific similarities between Muhammad's career and that of Atreides.
Appearances
Novels
Dune (first appearance)
Dune Messiah
Children of Dune
God Emperor of Dune (Other Memory of Leto II)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
Chapterhouse: Dune (mentioned only)
Dune (first appearance)
Dune Messiah
Children of Dune
God Emperor of Dune (Other Memory of Leto II)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
Chapterhouse: Dune (mentioned only)
Adaptations
Dune (1984)
Frank Herbert's Dune
"Dune"
"Muad'Dib"
"The Prophet"
Frank Herbert's Children of Dune
"Messiah"
"The Children"
"The Golden Path"
Dune (2021)
Dune: Part Two
Dune (1984)
Frank Herbert's Dune
"Dune"
"Muad'Dib"
"The Prophet"
"Dune"
"Muad'Dib"
"The Prophet"
Frank Herbert's Children of Dune
"Messiah"
"The Children"
"The Golden Path"
"Messiah"
"The Children"
"The Golden Path"
Dune (2021)
Dune: Part Two
References
↑ Dune - Chapter 33: "You shall be known among us as Usul, the base of the pillar. This is your secret name, your troop name. We of Sietch Tabr may use it, but none other may so presume
↑ Dune - Chapter 33: "I am an Atreides," Paul whispered, and then louder: "It's not right that I give up entirely the name my father gave me. Could I be known among you as Paul-Muad'Dib?" "You are Paul-Muad'Dib," Stilgar said.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 54: But Paul Atreides had passed from the universe of reality into the alam al-mythal while still alive, fleeing from this thing which his son had dared. Now there was only The Preacher
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 1: Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad'dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his sister, Alia, it is difficult to see the real persons behind these veils. But there were, after all, a man born Paul Atreides and a woman born Alia. Their flesh was subject to space and time. And even though their oracular powers placed them beyond the usual limits of time and space, they came from human stock. They experienced real events which left real traces upon a real universe. To understand them, it must be seen that their catastrophe was the catastrophe of all mankind. This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad'dib or his sister, but to their heirs -- to all of us.
↑ Dune - Chapter 25: "Your father lies dead in the ruins of Arrakeen," Kynes said. "You are
technically the Duke."
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 1: Above all else, Muad'dib was the kwisatz haderach which the Sisterhood's breeding program had sought across thousands of generations.
↑ Dune -Chapter 24: "The desert imposes its own rhythms," Stilgar said. "We welcomed him, called him our Mahdi, our Muad'dib, and gave him his secret name. Base of the Pillar: Usul."
↑ Dune -Chapter 45: There can be no more doubt. He is a man, yet he sees through to the Water of Life in the way of a Reverend Mother. He is indeed the Lisan al-Gaib.
↑ 9.0 9.1 9.2 9.3 Dune Messiah - Chapter 1: this man became Emperor Muad'dib and executed a marriage of convenience with a daughter of the Padishah Emperor he had defeated.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 59: "Are you a Truthsayer, then?" "I am." Another flat statement filled with self-assurance. "And Ghanima as well?" "No." The Preacher broke his silence then, turning his blind sockets toward Halleck but pointing at Leto.
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: "Majesty," Paul said, "your force is reduced by one more. Shall we now shed sham and pretense? Shall we now discuss what must be? Your daughter wed to me and the way opened for an Atreides to sit on the throne."
↑ 12.0 12.1 Dune - Chapter 48: "Think on it, Chani: that princess will have the name, yet she'll live as less than a concubine -- never to know a moment of tenderness from the man to whom she's bound. While we, Chani, we who carry the name of concubine -- history will call us wives."
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 15: "It'll be in their breeding records: Jessica out of Tanidia Nerus by the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen."
↑ Dune - Chapter 22: He had seen two main branchings along the way ahead--in one he confronted an evil old Baron and said: "Hello, Grandfather." The thought of that path and what lay along it sickened him.
↑ 15.0 15.1 15.2 Dune - Chapter 1: The old woman studied Paul in one gestalten flicker: face oval like Jessica's, but strong bones . . . hair: the Duke's black-black but with brow line of the maternal grandfather who cannot be named, and that thin, disdainful nose; shape of directly staring green eyes: like the old Duke, the paternal grandfather who is dead.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: And the way she called his mother Jessica like a common serving wench instead of what she was -- a Bene Gesserit Lady, a duke's concubine and mother of the ducal heir.
↑ Dune - Chapter 6: Paul watched his father enter the training room... The Duke said: "Hard at work, Son?"
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: No, he reassured himself, for Alia-the-Strange-One, his sister, had gone there with his mother and with Chani -- a twenty-thumper trip into the south, riding a Reverend Mother's palanquin fixed to the back of a wild maker.
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: Yet Chani was deep in the south -- in the cold country where the sun was hot --secreted in one of the new sietch strongholds, safe with their son, Leto II.
↑ 20.0 20.1 Dune Messiah - Chapter 23: "Let my son be called Leto for my father," Paul said, straightening. "At the time of naming," Harah said, "I will stand beside you as a friend of the mother and give that name." "And my daughter," Paul said. "Let her be called Ghanima."
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: Let us see if you're proof against poison! Feyd-Rautha thought. He saluted Paul with the Emperor's blade, said: "Meet your death, fool." "Shall we fight, cousin?" Paul asked.
↑ Dune - Chapter 26: But Rabban's younger brother, young Feyd-
Rautha. There was a sharpness to the boy that the Baron enjoyed . . . a ferocity.
↑ (Dune - Chapter 1: "So I've heard, so I've heard," wheezed the old woman. "Yet he's already fifteen."… Dune - Chapter 5: YUEH (yu'e), Wellington (weling-tun), Stdrd 10,082-10,191;) 10191-15=10176
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: Do not be deceived by the fact that he was born on Caladan and lived his first fifteen years there.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: Paul sensed his own tensions, decided to practice one of the mind-body lessons his mother had taught him.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: Dr. Yueh, his teacher, had hinted that the faufreluches class system was not rigidly guarded on Arrakis.
↑ Dune - Chapter 6: All the special training from Hawat and his mother -- the mnemonics, the focusing of awareness, the muscle control and sharpening of sensitivities, the study of languages and nuances of voices -- all of it clicked into a new kind of understanding in his mind.
↑ Dune - Chapter 4: But Muad'Dib did have wonderful companion-teachers. There was Gurney Halleck, the troubadour-warrior.
↑ Dune - Chapter 4: But Muad'Dib did have wonderful companion-teachers… There were Duncan Idaho, the Swordmaster of the Ginaz
↑ Children of Dune, page 83. "Tyekanik, fresh from a savage argument with Farad'n's mother, glanced sidelong at the Prince, noting how the lad's flesh was firming as he approached his eighteenth birthday."  10219 - 18 = 10201.
↑ 31.0 31.1 Children of Dune - Chapter 62: Pilgrim women were dancing to drum and flute in the Temple plaza, no coverings on their heads, bangles at their necks, their dresses thin and revealing…. Then a yellow-clad arm arose from the press of people; a crysknife was brandished in its hand. She saw the knife strike downward, bury itself in The Preacher's chest... But people already were drawing back, making an open space around a crumpled figure on the steps... Then a voice screeched from the mob: "Muad'Dib! They've killed Muad'Dib!"
↑ God Emperor of Dune - Chapter 7: There are only a few of my ancestors here. The water of Muad'Dib is here. Ghani and Harq al-Ada are here, of course, but they're not my ancestors.
↑ Dune - Chapter 4: Paul snapped up the rapier, feinted fast and whipped it back for a slow thrust timed to enter a shield's mindless defenses.
↑ Dune - Chapter 33: Paul stood alone now just into the ring, clad in the fighting trunks he'd worn under his stillsuit. He held a crysknife in his right hand; his feet were bare against the sand-gritted rock.
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 15:  Bannerjee acted out of instinct and the assurance that the young woman's father had been a member of the Emperor's Death Commandos, the dreaded Fedaykin, in the days before the Jihad. Otherwise, he might have ignored her plea that her message was intended only for the ears of Muad'dib.
↑ Dune - Chapter 33: "I invoke the amtal rule," Jamis said. "It's my right."
↑ Dune - Chapter 45: And it came to pass in the third year of the Desert War that Paul-Muad'Dib lay alone in the Cave of Birds beneath the kiswa hangings of an inner cell.
↑ Dune - Chapter 47: "My brother comes now," Alia said. "Even an Emperor may tremble before Muad'Dib, for he has the strength of righteousness and heaven smiles upon him."
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 9: "My sister killed the Baron," Paul said, voice and manner dry, "just before the battle of Arrakeen."
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: If Feyd Rautha wishes it, he may meet you with my blade in his hand." "I wish it," Feyd-Rautha said, and Paul saw the elation on the man's face.
↑ Dune Messiah - Excerpts from the Death Cell Interview with Bronso of IX: Twelve years of Muad'dib's Jihad created the argument.
↑ Dune Messiah - Chapter 19: Chani had arisen early, awakened by a stillness in the Keep. Awakening, she'd found Paul sitting beside her, his eyeless sockets aimed at some formless place beyond the far wall of their bedchamber.
↑ Dune - Chapter 40: Stilgar planted the staff in the sand beside Paul, dropped his hands to his sides. The blue-within-blue eyes remained level and intent. And Paul thought how his own eyes already were assuming this mask of color from the spice.
↑ Dune - Chapter 1: "Is he not small for his age, Jessica?" the old woman asked. Her voice wheezed and twanged like an untuned baliset.
↑ Dune - Appendix II: The Religion of Dune
Old Duke • Leto Atreides I • Paul Atreides • Leto Atreides II
Atreides at Corrin • Jessica Atreides • Alia Atreides • Chani Kynes • Leto Atreides II the Elder • Ghanima Atreides • Moneo Atreides • Siona Atreides
Duncan Idaho • Gurney Halleck • Thufir Hawat • Wellington Yueh • Fedor • Mattai • Arkie • Gladiator • Stilgar