Sardaukar
Organisation information
Founder(s)
Founded
Known members
Aramsham
Tyekanik
Unnamed Sardaukar Commander
Succeeded by
Headquarters
Affiliation
Atreides Empire
House Corrino (formerly)
Enemies
Contents
1 History
2 Upbringing, Training and benefits
3 Appearance and Fighting Style

3.1 Weapons used
3.1 Weapons used
4 Known Sardaukar

4.1 Apocryphal
4.1 Apocryphal
5 Gallery

5.1 Illustrations
5.2 Apocrypha
5.3 Adaptations
5.1 Illustrations
5.2 Apocrypha
5.3 Adaptations
6 Behind the scenes
7 Appearances
8 See also
9 References
History
In the year 10,191 A.G., Shaddam entered into a deal with the House of Harkonnen to eliminate the House of Atreides, whose popularity was becoming a threat to not only the Emperor but other powerful interests in the Empire, such as the Bene Gesserit and the Spacing Guild. To that end, the Emperor made Duke Leto Atreides give up his fiefdom over the planet Caladan and move to Arrakis, which was the sole location where the spice melange could be found. The Emperor then loaned Sardaukar troops to Baron Vladimir Harkonnen for their attack on Atreides. For that operation, the Sardaukar dressed in Harkonnen uniforms, but it became obvious to the Atreides that it was Sardaukar instead of Harkonnen troops attacking them.
What the Emperor and Harkonnen did not plan on was the survival of Leto's consort Jessica and his son Paul. The pair were banished to the desert, where they were taken in by the Fremen natives of Arrakis. Paul rose to a position of leadership in the Fremen and led them on a guerrilla war against the Harkonnen that all but stopped spice production in Arrakis.
During a raid against the Fremen, they killed Paul and Chani's firstborn son.
With the Guild breathing down his neck, Shaddam sent 5 legions of Sardaukar to Arrakis. It did no good, as the Sardaukar were crushed by the Fremen natives, and the Emperor was captured by Paul and his Fremen allies.
Following the Arrakis Affair and Shaddam's deposition, the Sardaukar were exiled with the rest of House Corrino to Salusa Secundus. The Treaty of Arrakeen limited the Sardaukar to a small ammount of legions, ensuring the Corrino succesors could not attempt a revolt against the Atreides. The Sardaukar sold the body of Atreides Swordsmaster Duncan Idaho to the Bene Tleilax. Shaddam's daughter Wensicia Corrino attempted to restore the Sardaukar, drilling in strict values. They were subjected to rigorous training and little luxury. All Sardaukar were required to give their full name and title when introducing themselves. Wensicia's son, Farad'n, shared none of the dauntless ambition of her mother. Ultimately, he refused to go through with her plans and became the Concubine of Ghanima Atreides. Farad'n gifted the Sardaukar to the newly instated Emperor Leto Atreides II.
Upbringing, Training and benefits
Sardaukar Barracks - Art by Mark Molnar
Members of the Sardaukar were raised from a young age in an unforgiving natural environment that saw almost half (6 out of every 13) die before the age of 11. Intense training gave them formidable swordsmanship and espionage abilities, and instilled in them a religious fervor that added to their mystique and served to make them even more loyal to the Imperial house.
The fighting abilities of the Sardaukar were renowned throughout the Old Imperium. At the apex of their sway over the affairs of the Universe, it was said that their swordsmanship was comparable to that of a Ginaz Tenth Level, and their cunning abilities at in-fighting were said to match that of a Bene Gesserit adept. Any one Sardaukar was rated a match for any ten standard Landsraad military conscripts.
The abilities of the Sardaukar were largely attributed to the harsh environment and brutal discipline they were exposed to on the planet Salusa Secundus, the Corrino prison planet. Only the Fremen, raised in the fanatical warrior culture and merciless desert environment of Arrakis, were capable of matching the Sardaukar. Fremen typically scorned Harkonnen soldiers as cowardly and weak, but judged that the Sardaukar fought well, and even respected them to some degree.
During the Fremen uprising on Arrakis, the Sardaukar suffered a devastating defeat, opening the way for Paul Atreides' elevation to the Golden Lion Throne and the title of Emperor. Subsequently, the Sardaukar became a marginal force, continuing to act as the standing army and guardians for the newly-deposed House Corrino, though they deliberately avoided direct conflict with the powerful Fremen forces of the Atreides Empire.
Appearance and Fighting Style
Sardaukar troops typically wore uniforms and helmets of grey and black with gold trimming. Some of their members wore their hair long, which was taken as a sign of arrogance by those who beheld them. They had a distinct combat style, which allowed them to be recognised easily.
Sardaukar v Fremen - Art by Matt Griffin
When in close-quarter, hand-to-hand combat, if they found themselves surrounded they would group into trios and adopt a triangular fighting stance with their backs to each other. They would carry weapons on their person that would be ingeniously concealed, such as shigawire in their hair or a fake toe or two inserted with small stabbing weapons. Sardaukar were also experts at covert operations, managing to conceal themselves among groups for extended periods of time before striking.
During the Harkonnen attack on planet Arrakis, when it was under the control of House Atreides, Sardaukar troops were provided by Emperor Shaddam IV to assist the Harkonnens. Even though the Sardaukar forces were disguised in Harkonnen livery, the Atreides managed to recognize the Sardaukar by their combat style and often hawk-like features.
Weapons used
Throwing-knife
Stunner
Known Sardaukar
Aramsham
Tyekanik
Unnamed Sardaukar Commander
Apocryphal
Erta
Kardif
Khan
Marduk
Maximilian Banarc
Wolfram von Wallach
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptations
Behind the scenes
The Sardaukar are most similar to the Roman Praetorian Guard, Ottoman Janissaries, and to the French Foreign Legion whose elite soldiers have much in common with the Sardaukar such as the selection of the best (only 12,5% of Legion candidates pass), honor and fidelity to their army corps and especially because like the Sardaukar, some Legionnaires are former prisoners. They also look like the Spartan army in stereotypes because like the Sardaukar, Spartan soldiers were brought up from an early age and around the age of 18 had to kill their first person in order to become a soldier. But this was proven in recent times to be false.
Appearances
Dune (novel)
Dune Messiah (mentioned only)
Children of Dune
God Emperor of Dune (mentioned only)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
See also
Images of the Sardaukar
References
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 9: Princess, I long for the day when House Corrino returns to its rightful seat of power. So does every remaining Sardaukar here on Salusa.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 32: His Sardaukar legions remained small, but once more they were a man-to-man match for the Fremen. That served little purpose as long as the limits imposed by the Treaty of Arrakeen governed the relative size of the forces.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 19 :But the Tleilaxu had bought his body from the Sardaukar and, in their regeneration vats, they had grown a zombie-katrundo
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 28: The restoration of his Sardaukar forces was a task in itself ...
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 32: He thought of his Sardaukar once more growing tough and resilient through the rigorous training and the denial of luxury which he commanded
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 9: Do not fall into the lazy ways which spreadthrough our Imperium. Full name, complete title -- attention to every detail. Those attributes will send the Atreides lifeblood into the sands of Arrakis.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 64: "Give them," Ghanima echoed."He'll have
them one way or another." Farad'n heard fear for himself in her voice. Love, then? Leto asked not for reason, but for an intuitive leap. "Take them," Farad'n said. "Indeed," Leto said.