Spacing Guild
Organisation information
Headquarters
Intentions
After the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood, the Guild was the second mental-physical training school established after the Butlerian Jihad, and its monopoly on space travel and interplanetary banking marked the starting point of the Imperial Calendar (1 AG).
Contents
1 History

1.1 Post-Butlerian Jihad
1.2 Under the Corrino Empire

1.2.1 The Arrakis Affair


1.3 Under the God Emperor
1.4 After the God Emperor
1.1 Post-Butlerian Jihad
1.2 Under the Corrino Empire

1.2.1 The Arrakis Affair
1.2.1 The Arrakis Affair
1.3 Under the God Emperor
1.4 After the God Emperor
2 Structure

2.1 Hierarchy
2.2 Dependency
2.1 Hierarchy
2.2 Dependency
3 Gallery

3.1 Apocrypha
3.2 Adaptations
3.1 Apocrypha
3.2 Adaptations
4 References
History
Post-Butlerian Jihad
Shortly after the climax of the Butlerian Jihad, the Spacing Guild had already begun to solidify its monopoly over all interstellar travel, having achieved such when the Orange Catholic Bible was compiled following the leaders of religions meeting to exchange views - a move encouraged by both the Guild and Bene Gesserit. Details of their emergence were contentious, although it was believed they started as a serious political and economic force around the time of the Great Convention in the 1st century AG.
Under the Corrino Empire
While the exact evolution of the Guild's monopoly on faster-than-light space travel is not given, they did nonetheless wield this formidable power throughout the entire Corrino Empire - a time known as the Guild Peace.
When the Desert War reached its apex during the year 10193 AG, the Guild made overtures to the Bene Gesserit, hinting that its Navigators were "bothered about the future" and saw "problems on the horizon."
As such, the Guild lowered its transport fees so that every Great House army headed to Arrakis with Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to end the repeated sabotage of spice production by armies of Fremen insurgents united under Duke Paul-Muad'Dib Atreides. However, Paul threatened to poison every spice field and its underground sandtrout if the Guild did not withdraw their troops and send them back home. Because their limited powers of prophecy showed that Paul was fully capable of this action and more than willing to follow through with it, they yielded to his demands and allowed the Atreides Duke to ascend the Golden Lion Throne and exile the last Corrino monarch.
Paul Atreides was the first Emperor to moderate the Guild's power through the control of their spice supply, although they remained a significant political power for many years to come.
Under the God Emperor
New problems for the Spacing Guild were created by the ascendancy of Leto Atreides II as God Emperor of the Known Universe. His extremely long lifespan, coupled with his fanatical devotion to his Golden Path strategy for humanity's survival, saw him hoard the spice melange with no concern for short-term problems.
Thus, over the many centuries of his rule, the Guild was bent to his will and its unique powerbase of old was significantly diminished.
After the God Emperor
While the Spacing Guild remained a powerful body even after the death of Leto II, their influence gradually eroded. By the return of the Honored Matres, the success of humanity's Scattering into the cosmos had created new and largely unknown threats to their hegemony. Ixian no-ships were in common use at this time, and their advanced navigation computers fully replaced the need for Guild Navigators. As such, the Guild had lost its monopoly on space travel.
Structure
Hierarchy
The Spacing Guild was by its very nature a secretive organization that took up functions previously covered by the Thinking Machines, just as Mentats and the Bene Gesserit did. Their very existence rested on the proprietary knowledge they had clung to for millennia.
The inner structure of the Guild during and after the time of Paul Atreides was never fully revealed. However, it is known that the role of Guild Navigator was most prestigious, despite their numerous physical deformities.
Other known roles included administrators, attendants, ambassadors and technical support. Members of the Guild commonly wore gray uniforms.
Dependency
Navigators were utterly dependent on the spice melange to safely fold space via prescience and their Heighliner's Holtzman Drive. Even a partial restriction on their spice requirements rendered them powerless and reduced long distance trade and transport to a snail's pace.
Prior to the discovery of spice-induced prescience after the Jihad's ban on supercomputers, the use of a Spacefolder was extremely dangerous and destroyed roughly one in every eight starships due to the lack of viable methods for charting safe paths through gravitational hazards.
Gallery
Apocrypha
Adaptations
References
↑ Dune, Appendix II