Stillsuit
Production Information
Manufacturer
Type
Owners
Fremen
Locations
Physical and Technical Specifications
Structure
Facial MaskFiltplugMouth filterNose tubeWatertube
Filtplug
Mouth filter
Nose tube
Watertube
SuitCatchpocketsGlovesHeat-exchange and Filter systemRecath
Catchpockets
Gloves
Heat-exchange and Filter system
Recath
Usage and History
Purpose
Heritage
Contents
1 Design
2 Manufacture
3 Use
4 Individual parts
5 Gallery

5.1 Illustrations
5.2 Apocrypha
5.3 Adaptions
5.4 Videos

5.4.1 Background featurettes
5.1 Illustrations
5.2 Apocrypha
5.3 Adaptions
5.4 Videos

5.4.1 Background featurettes
5.4.1 Background featurettes
6 Appearances
7 See also
8 External links
Design
The stillsuit typically covered the entire body, up to the neck and wrists. For the hands, gloves could be worn. However, when delicate work was performed, Fremen discarded the gloves and rubbed their hands with leaves from the creosote bush. This allowed them to work, while the residue from the creosote leaves prevented perspiration.
A facial mask could also be worn so that moisture from the mouth and face could also be reclaimed.
As the planetologist Liet Kynes is assisting Duke Leto Atreides I with the fitting of his stillsuit, he explains the suit in this manner:
Manufacture
During the time of the Faufreluches, stillsuits were manufactured by Fremen as well as private entrepreneurs. However, Fremen-manufactured stillsuits were widely considered the highest in quality, as they were the only ones that could preserve the body's moisture in the deep desert. Only an average of a thimbleful of water (2-5 ml) a day was lost when a Fremen stillsuit was worn.
Use
Fremen stillsuit discipline was very strict. Since an individual's body water belonged to the tribe, it was everybody's personal responsibility to preserve as much of their water as possible. Moreover, when crossing the Deep desert, utter adherence to maximum stillsuit discipline was the only way one would have a chance of surviving. While in sietch, stillsuit discipline was more relaxed.
One of the measures of the progress of Arrakis' transformation from a desert planet to a lush world was when Fremen no longer required to wear stillsuits in the open air.
Individual parts
Breathing Mask (also Filter Mask or Moisture Mask)
Catchpockets
Gloves
Filt-plugs (Nostril plugs)
Recath (presumably similar to today's catheters)
Stillsuit Cap
Stillsuit Hood
Watertube
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptions
Videos
'Filmbook' style background featurettes from the film series, providing additional insights into various aspects and details of the Dune universe.
Appearances
Dune
Dune Messiah
Children of Dune
God Emperor of Dune
Heretics of Dune
See also
Images of stillsuits
Stilltent - A portable temporary shelter (part of a fremkit) that uses the same design principles as the stillsuit to preserve moisture and water.
External links
Stillsuit article at Technovelgy.com
Filt-plug article at Technovelgy.com