This page was made a Featured Article
View the archived version here
Vladimir Harkonnen
Political Information
Titles
Great House
Affiliation and Relationships
Loyalty
Family members
Abulurd Harkonnen (ancestor)
Unnamed father
Abulurd Rabban (demibrother)
Glossu Rabban (nephew)
Unnamed Demibrothers
Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen (nephew/legal ward)
Unnamed sister-in-law
Unnamed nephews
Unnamed nieces
Jessica Atreides (daughter)
Paul Atreides (grandson)
Alia Atreides (granddaughter)
Leto Atreides II the Elder (great-grandson)
Leto Atreides II (great-grandson)
Ghanima Atreides (great-granddaughter)
Romances
Biographical Information
Born
Died
Place of death
Military Information
Battles/Wars
Physical Characteristics
Eyes
Dune(1965)
Children of Dune (Ego-memory)(1976)
Siridar-Baron Vladimir Harkonnen (/ˈhɑːrkənən/) (10110 AG - December 10193 AG) was the penultimate ruler of House Harkonnen and chief architect behind the demise of Duke Leto Atreides during the final reigning years of Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV. Aided by his nephews, "Beast” Rabban and Feyd-Rautha, and his mentat, Piter de Vries, Vladimir conspired for their House to dominate Arrakis and eventually the Golden Lion Throne before their ultimate defeat by House Atreides and their Fremen legions during the Desert War - an event which ousted House Harkonnen, House Corrino and even the Spacing Guild from their positions of power.
Contents
1 Biography

1.1 Background
1.2 Family
1.3 Leadership
1.4 Death on Arrakis
1.1 Background
1.2 Family
1.3 Leadership
1.4 Death on Arrakis
2 Description
3 Quotes
4 Gallery

4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
4.1 Illustrations
4.2 Apocrypha
4.3 Adaptations
5 Trivia
6 Appearances

6.1 Novels
6.2 Adaptations
6.1 Novels
6.2 Adaptations
7 References
Biography
Background
Family
Vladimir had possessed no male heirs of his own, though he did sire a daughter through the Bene Gesserit breeding program in his youth. To accommodate for this, Vladimir effectively adopted his youngest nephew, Feyd-Rautha, and raised him as his future successor. The Baron showered Feyd with praise and the promise of eventual leadership, and was also implied to have an incestual lust for his nephew, but his hold over the cunning and impulsive youth remained tenuous, with Feyd even attempting to assassinate him by planting a poison needle in the thigh of a young slave boy, knowing that was the spot his uncle was most likely to touch.
Meanwhile, the Baron found good use in his eldest nephew, Glossu Rabban, who, despite being considered too brutish and stupid by uncle, was eventually appointed planetary governor of Arrakis.
Leadership
The Baron showed remarkable insight in his recognition of efficiency and talent, as shown in his use of the Twisted Mentat, Piter de Vries, and the way he shaped and positioned his nephews in a grandiose plan to reinstate Harkonnen control over Arrakis. He also had the self-awareness to recognize personal flaws that barred him from pursuing otherwise advantageous strategies such as enlisting the talents of Truthsayers in advisory roles, citing his sexual tastes and extreme distrust of Bene Gesserit witches.
Vladimir's rule of House Harkonnen proved to be notoriously cruel among the other Great Houses. His reputation as a hedonistic pleasure seeker with destructive appetites included a sadistic penchant for young boys, who were sometimes drugged when he wasn't in the mood for "wrestling." Bribes, blackmail, torture, murder and slavery were all considered justified necessities of power, as shown in his treatment of Wellington Yueh and Thufir Hawat, and this systemic cruelty characterized the way his soldiers and administrators handled subordinates and prisoners.
The Baron was known to exploit this ruthless reputation by ordering executions over apparently trivial matters to rid himself of threats. This was particularly evident in how he dealt with Feyd's co-conspirators for their part in the aforementioned thigh-needle, having the slavemaster summarily executed under the pretense of losing a chess game, as well as a couple guards for their clumsy handling of the slave boy's corpse. Such cunning was further emphasized by his coercion of Doctor Yueh's betrayal of House Atreides, wording his promised reward of "freeing Wanna from her agony" in a vague enough fashion that, much to Yueh's lack of surprise, "joining his wife" meant ending their lives. Of course, Vladimir justified this treachery as a practical safeguard, claiming that no traitor could ever be trusted. Just as callous towards his own forces, he did not hesitate to leave his men to die from the poisonous vapor in Duke Leto's boobytrapped tooth before gloating over his own survival.
Despite his sharp and cunning intellect, Baron Vladimir's arrogance and intense hatred for House Atreides proved to be his undoing.
Death on Arrakis
Vladimir Harkonnen died at age 83 in the year 10193, during the defeat of House Harkonnen and Sardaukar forces at the hands of Fremen hordes and wormriders on the Plains of Arrakeen. Distracted by the chaos looming around him within the audience chamber of the Emperor's hutment, he was fatally pricked with a Gom Jabbar wielded by a young Alia Atreides as she informed him of her true identity as his granddaughter.
Following his death, the Barony of House Harkonnen briefly passed on to Feyd-Rautha. Held prisoner at the Arrakeen governor's mansion with the Emperor and his daughter Irulan, Feyd challenged Paul Atreides to a duel and met his end on the latter's blade. Passed on to Vladimir's daughter, Lady Jessica declined her father's inheritance, wanting no part in the House that murdered her Duke and drove her family to exile. Paul, now the last living heir, subsumed House Harkonnen into his own - as the Bene Gesserit Sisterhood originally hoped to accomplish with their planned wedding of an Atreides daughter to Feyd-Rautha.
However, death was not the end for Vladimir. After Jessica transmuted the Water of Life to become Reverend Mother of Sietch Tabr, Alia was born with fully awakened ancestral memories, including those of her maternal grandfather. In the early throes of Abomination during her reign as Regent of the Atreides Empire, Alia initially shared control of her body with the Baron's ego-memory in exchange for his protection against other ancestral forces, but his lust for revenge and new life slowly consumed her and supplanted her own mind. In the end, however, this vengeful persona proved fruitless against Alia's supreme willpower in overcoming her possession by suicide.
Description
Besides spider-black eyes beneath enfolded eyelids, cheeks like cherubic mounds, bobbing jowls around protruding lips, and large hands that glittered with rings, the Baron's most notable feature was his immensely corpulent frame - implied to be the result of his unchecked gluttony and family genetics, according to his observation on Rabban's growing body fat. Unable or unwilling to walk on his own, all this weight required numerous suspensors harnessed to his flesh, and he could only recline in levitating suspensor thrones.
Being a large man covered in bulbous devices, he always wore dark and loose-fitting robes along with lavish capes for special occasions.
Despite his authoritarian oppression and predatory pleasures, Vladimir Harkonnen seemed to have a rudimentary code of honor. Besides his claim of inflicting pain and fear only when politically necessary, he convinced himself not to keep Paul Atreides as a personal sex slave and even discouraged Piter de Vries from doing the same with Lady Jessica - although this was ultimately a self-serving safeguard against the mother and son's dangerous Bene Gesserit training, and partly also to avoid prematurely making an enemy out of Shaddam IV (as the latter insisted that Paul and Jessica be spared). He also implored the captive Duke Leto not to make it necessary for Piter to torture information from him, even expressing irritated distaste for the Mentat's boasted methods. However, his concern for the Duke's suffering seemed more out of begrudging respect for his station than the act of harming a fellow human being.
Quotes
Gallery
Illustrations
Apocrypha
Adaptations
Trivia
Baron Harkonnen's depiction in scree. adaptions varies widly:
Alejandro Jodorowsky wanted famed actor, director and screenwriter Orson Welles to portray Vladimir Harkonnen in his unsuccessful attempt to produce a film adaptation of Dune in the early 1970s. The late Kenneth McMillan was the first to actually portray him on screen, followed by Ian McNeice and Stellan Skarsgård.
Besides a full head of red hair that influenced most future depictions, David Lynch's 1984 rendition of the Baron was given a more gritty and hideous appearance - drenched in sweat and plagued with diseased pustules that required constant draining - as well as a more unstable personality prone to psychotic ranting and cackling. The pustules bore a strong resemblance to a symptom of AIDS, which was prevalent at the time of the movie's release. Rather than a series of thin straps, his suspensor harness resembles a full-body straightjacket with cables plugged into his bare chest. His demise was also dramatically embellished: instead of merely poisoning him as the climactic battle rages outside the Emperor's encampment, Alia proceeds to tear out his suspensor cables before telekinetically throwing him through a demolished wall and into the open jaws of her brother's sandworm.
On a similar note, while his pederasty is never directly acknowledged in the 1984 film, it was given an indirect reference in one of the scenes of the movie, which featured Harkonnen torturing one of his servants in a scene interspliced with a romantic embrace between Leto and Jessica Atreides.
Although the 2000 miniseries still retains his sadistic nature from the book, it's downplayed in favor of his more manipulative scheming, with his pederasty similarly toned down in favor of adult slaves. He is also shown to speak in iambic pentameter on multiple occasions.
In relation to the focus on his manipulative scheming abilities, the miniseries explicitly states that Baron Harkonnen designed the plan to depose House Altreides in its entirety, while in the novel, it's heavily implied that Piter de Vries was responsible for most if not all of the planning.
In Denis Villeneuve's 2021 and 2024 films, the Baron - like all members of his Great House - is stark-white and completely hairless from minimal UV exposure and toxic levels of industrial and pharmaceutical chemicals. While very obese, he remains structurally handsome with blue eyes, broad shoulders and muscular limbs powerful enough to lift a grown man with one hand. Unlike the book and previous adaptations, the Baron's suspensors are bolted directly into his spine, which makes an audible popping crunch whenever it's relieved of gravity. Interestingly, his lengthy robes cause him to appear abnormally tall and worm-like while hovering - a possible foreshadowing of his great-grandson. Like his book counterpart, he wears multiple rings including a jointed finger sheath which contains his personal shield generator. Similar to the 1984 version, he also has an embellished death. In this case, however, Emperor Shaddam IV proceeded to personally inflict mortal wounds on the Baron by having the Shardaukar destroy both his life support system as well as his suspensors as punishment for neglecting to scan the supposedly "uninhabited" region of the planet, with Paul Atreides also proceeding to finish him off instead of Alia (due to the latter still developing in Jessica's womb) as the latter was trying to ascend Leto's throne, also making clear he's his grandson immediately before dealing the final blow similar to Alia, and similar to the 1984 film his corpse was thrown into the desert upon death in an ironic parallel with how he had tried to do the same to Jessica and Paul. The Water of life's flashbacks also seem to imply that Harkonnen was at least aware of Jessica being his daughter and showing a softer side around her as an infant.
The Baron's homosexuality was given an indirect reference via his binding a stripped and drugged Leto Altreides to the table and making him watch as he pigs out at the dinner table. However, it's also significantly downplayed to the extent that he willingly keeps female concubines in the Villeneuve version (and was also implied to be aware of Jessica being his daughter in the water of life visions), with only subtle hints at his book version's predilections (aside from the scene with Leto, he also briefly kisses Feyd during the latter's coronation, and his bath attendants have see-through clothing).
While the book's suspensors only lighten his weight enough to walk without strain, all three screen adaptations fully levitate off the ground when he's not resting - an embellishment that apparently originated from Jodorowsky's screenplay and storyboards. Dune: Part Two also features the book's levitating suspensor throne.
How Vladimir managed to survive Duke Leto's final act varies between sources. In the book, he merely flees through a secret escape hatch upon seeing Piter and his guards succumb to their poisoning. In the 1984 film, Leto's vision is blurred by his drugged state, causing him to only take out Piter with a short-range cloud. In the 2000 miniseries, the Baron barely manages to escape the growing gas cloud by flying across the room in a flailing panic (although the original script plays out more like the book). In the 2021 film, despite taking it right in the face, his personal shield slows the airborne toxin long enough for his suspensors to lift him to the dining hall's ceiling - although he later requires significant rehabilitation to detoxify and repair his ravaged lungs, which become permanently dependent on medical baths and levitating metal ventilators.
Alejandro Jodorowsky wanted famed actor, director and screenwriter Orson Welles to portray Vladimir Harkonnen in his unsuccessful attempt to produce a film adaptation of Dune in the early 1970s. The late Kenneth McMillan was the first to actually portray him on screen, followed by Ian McNeice and Stellan Skarsgård.
Besides a full head of red hair that influenced most future depictions, David Lynch's 1984 rendition of the Baron was given a more gritty and hideous appearance - drenched in sweat and plagued with diseased pustules that required constant draining - as well as a more unstable personality prone to psychotic ranting and cackling. The pustules bore a strong resemblance to a symptom of AIDS, which was prevalent at the time of the movie's release. Rather than a series of thin straps, his suspensor harness resembles a full-body straightjacket with cables plugged into his bare chest. His demise was also dramatically embellished: instead of merely poisoning him as the climactic battle rages outside the Emperor's encampment, Alia proceeds to tear out his suspensor cables before telekinetically throwing him through a demolished wall and into the open jaws of her brother's sandworm.
On a similar note, while his pederasty is never directly acknowledged in the 1984 film, it was given an indirect reference in one of the scenes of the movie, which featured Harkonnen torturing one of his servants in a scene interspliced with a romantic embrace between Leto and Jessica Atreides.
On a similar note, while his pederasty is never directly acknowledged in the 1984 film, it was given an indirect reference in one of the scenes of the movie, which featured Harkonnen torturing one of his servants in a scene interspliced with a romantic embrace between Leto and Jessica Atreides.
Although the 2000 miniseries still retains his sadistic nature from the book, it's downplayed in favor of his more manipulative scheming, with his pederasty similarly toned down in favor of adult slaves. He is also shown to speak in iambic pentameter on multiple occasions.
In relation to the focus on his manipulative scheming abilities, the miniseries explicitly states that Baron Harkonnen designed the plan to depose House Altreides in its entirety, while in the novel, it's heavily implied that Piter de Vries was responsible for most if not all of the planning.
In relation to the focus on his manipulative scheming abilities, the miniseries explicitly states that Baron Harkonnen designed the plan to depose House Altreides in its entirety, while in the novel, it's heavily implied that Piter de Vries was responsible for most if not all of the planning.
In Denis Villeneuve's 2021 and 2024 films, the Baron - like all members of his Great House - is stark-white and completely hairless from minimal UV exposure and toxic levels of industrial and pharmaceutical chemicals. While very obese, he remains structurally handsome with blue eyes, broad shoulders and muscular limbs powerful enough to lift a grown man with one hand. Unlike the book and previous adaptations, the Baron's suspensors are bolted directly into his spine, which makes an audible popping crunch whenever it's relieved of gravity. Interestingly, his lengthy robes cause him to appear abnormally tall and worm-like while hovering - a possible foreshadowing of his great-grandson. Like his book counterpart, he wears multiple rings including a jointed finger sheath which contains his personal shield generator. Similar to the 1984 version, he also has an embellished death. In this case, however, Emperor Shaddam IV proceeded to personally inflict mortal wounds on the Baron by having the Shardaukar destroy both his life support system as well as his suspensors as punishment for neglecting to scan the supposedly "uninhabited" region of the planet, with Paul Atreides also proceeding to finish him off instead of Alia (due to the latter still developing in Jessica's womb) as the latter was trying to ascend Leto's throne, also making clear he's his grandson immediately before dealing the final blow similar to Alia, and similar to the 1984 film his corpse was thrown into the desert upon death in an ironic parallel with how he had tried to do the same to Jessica and Paul. The Water of life's flashbacks also seem to imply that Harkonnen was at least aware of Jessica being his daughter and showing a softer side around her as an infant.
The Baron's homosexuality was given an indirect reference via his binding a stripped and drugged Leto Altreides to the table and making him watch as he pigs out at the dinner table. However, it's also significantly downplayed to the extent that he willingly keeps female concubines in the Villeneuve version (and was also implied to be aware of Jessica being his daughter in the water of life visions), with only subtle hints at his book version's predilections (aside from the scene with Leto, he also briefly kisses Feyd during the latter's coronation, and his bath attendants have see-through clothing).
The Baron's homosexuality was given an indirect reference via his binding a stripped and drugged Leto Altreides to the table and making him watch as he pigs out at the dinner table. However, it's also significantly downplayed to the extent that he willingly keeps female concubines in the Villeneuve version (and was also implied to be aware of Jessica being his daughter in the water of life visions), with only subtle hints at his book version's predilections (aside from the scene with Leto, he also briefly kisses Feyd during the latter's coronation, and his bath attendants have see-through clothing).
While the book's suspensors only lighten his weight enough to walk without strain, all three screen adaptations fully levitate off the ground when he's not resting - an embellishment that apparently originated from Jodorowsky's screenplay and storyboards. Dune: Part Two also features the book's levitating suspensor throne.
How Vladimir managed to survive Duke Leto's final act varies between sources. In the book, he merely flees through a secret escape hatch upon seeing Piter and his guards succumb to their poisoning. In the 1984 film, Leto's vision is blurred by his drugged state, causing him to only take out Piter with a short-range cloud. In the 2000 miniseries, the Baron barely manages to escape the growing gas cloud by flying across the room in a flailing panic (although the original script plays out more like the book). In the 2021 film, despite taking it right in the face, his personal shield slows the airborne toxin long enough for his suspensors to lift him to the dining hall's ceiling - although he later requires significant rehabilitation to detoxify and repair his ravaged lungs, which become permanently dependent on medical baths and levitating metal ventilators.
Appearances
Novels
Dune
Dune Messiah (mentioned only)
Children of Dune (ego-memory)
God Emperor of Dune (mentioned only)
Heretics of Dune (mentioned only)
Adaptations
Dune (1984)
Frank Herbert's Dune
Frank Herbert's Children of Dune
Dune (2021)
Dune Part Two
References
↑ 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 Dune - Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses): VLADIMIR HARKONNEN (10,110-10,193) Commonly referred to as Baron Harkonnen, his title is officially Siridar (planetary governor) Baron. Vladimir Harkonnen is the direct-line male descendant of the Bashar Abulurd Harkonnen who was banished for cowardice after the Battle of Corrin. The return of House Harkonnen to power generally is ascribed to adroit manipulation of the whale fur market and later consolidation with melange wealth from Arrakis. The Siridar-Baron died on Arrakis during the Revolt. Title passed briefly to the na-Baron, Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen.
↑ 2.0 2.1 2.2 Dune - Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses): COUNT GLOSSU RABBAN (10,132-10,193) Glossu Rabban, Count of Lankiveil, was the eldest nephew of Vladimir Harkonnen. Glossu Rabban and Feyd-Rautha Rabban (who took the name Harkonnen when chosen for the Siridar-Baron's household) were legal sons of the Siridar-Baron's youngest demibrother, Abulurd. Abulurd renounced the Harkonnen name and all rights to the title when given the subdistrict governorship of Rabban-Lankiveil.
↑ Dune - Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses): LADY JESSICA (Hon. Atreides) (10,154-10,256) A natural daughter (Bene Gesserit reference) of the Siridar-Baron Vladimir Harkonnen.
↑ Dune - Chapter 48: "And . . . oh, yes -- I've killed our grandfather, the demented old Baron. He had very little pain."
↑ 5.0 5.1 Dune - Chapter 47: The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen stood with eyes downcast in the Imperial audience chamber, the oval selamlik within the Padishah Emperor's hutment.... "I'm sorry, Grandfather," Alia said. "You've met the Atreides gom jabbar." She got to her feet, dropped a dark needle from her hand. The Baron fell back. His eyes bulged as he stared at a red slash on his left palm. "You . . . you . . . " He rolled sideways in his suspensors, a sagging mass of flesh supported inches off the floor with head lolling and mouth hanging open.
↑ Children of Dune - Chapter 15: "It'll be in their breeding records: Jessica out of Tanidia Nerus by the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen."
↑ Dune - Chapter 19: The fat cheeks were two cherubic mounds beneath spider- black eyes.
↑ 8.0 8.1 Dune - Chapter 26
↑ Dune - Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses)
Vladimir Harkonnen • Feyd-Rautha Harkonnen
Abulurd Harkonnen • Abulurd Rabban • Glossu Rabban
Piter de Vries • Umman Kudu • Iakin Nefud • Thufir Hawat • Czigo • Kinet • Pardee • "Soo-Soo"